In late November more than 250 people participated in a seminar and innovation challenge under the theme #HackGov: Empowering Indonesia. The Ministry of National Planning and Development (Bappenas), together with the UN Global Pulse in Jakarta, collaborated with Gadjah Mada University, Microsoft Indonesia and XL Axiata to blend approaches from the tech start-up scene with public policy challenges.Tech and development priorities“We are tackling three challenges in monitoring our progress toward Sustainable Development Goals: accessing data for measurement, effectively interpreting available data, and using them responsibly.”- Dr. Ir. Rr. Endah Murniningtyas, M.Sc., Deputy of Maritime and Natural Resource, Bappenas.A pre-hackathon seminar was held on 27th November 2015 focussing on how every aspect of society can support the realisation of the Sustainable Development Goals(SDGs) in Indonesia and the need for an adequate system of monitoring. By creating a lively forum for various stakeholders from academia, local governments, private sector, and NGOs, #HackGov built awareness of the benefits of data-driven innovations for frontline public service delivery and better impact tracking. Pulse Lab Jakarta also shared methodologies to measure development indicators through new forms of digital data, as complements to existing statistics.Paradigm change for public service delivery must touch upon digital transformation. Speakers from Microsoft Indonesia, Twitter Indonesia, IBM and Urban Poor Consortium highlighted the applications of technology for social development and XL Axiata’s dedicated internet service for women stated that, with internet penetration at one third of the population, Indonesia has additional challenges to achieve gender parity in internet access and to use the full potential of the internet as an empowerment tool.Hacking social systemsOne-hundred and ninety participants joined the hackthon on 28th and 29th November 2015. The hackathon is already a familiar concept among techies in Indonesia, but#HackGov brought something new to the table. Building from the idea that technology-driven social change needs teamwork, this innovation challenge combined the brilliant minds of programmers, designers, and social planners from different parts of Indonesia. The participants formed into 58 groups and created innovative applications based on municipal data.Re-purposing social technology in 24 hoursAt the end of the 24-hour hackathon, completed projects were submitted and several winners were annonced. In the category of Data Analysis and Visualisation for the SDGs, the Simpleo team won by visualising the correlation between birth mortality in Indonesia with factors such as poverty levels. The Drops application, developed by Circustudio team, swept the first place award for the Capturing Societal Aspirations category. This application bridges the concerns of citizens with the agenda of public servants on water access and contamination issues. The last category which focused on the Acceleration of Women’s Role in Technology and Social Innovation for Women’s Empowerment was the most popular among the participants resulting in many submissions. The winner, Nusantara Berdaya team created IstriBijak (‘wise wife’ in English), a family financial management service, by processing the expense records and salary allocation to better organise the household finances.Additional special awards were given under the categories of Best Design and Best Concept. Best Design was awarded to Devover team who created the Emak applicationfor better investment in women-driven industries and Womanesia team won the Best Concept category for the NoViolence application. NoViolence covers the powerful topic of harassment and aims to empower harassment victims to make use of the internet’s potential.#HackGov has produced many prototypes filled with great potential for both government and citizens in tracking development, providing feedback, and effectively processing data in accordance with the national development priorities in Indonesia.Pulse Lab Jakarta is grateful for the generous support from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Government of Australia.Welcome to the second edition of Pulse StoriesAt Pulse Lab Jakarta, one of our design principles is to put citizens at the centre of our innovation processes. Pulse Stories is part of our work to better understand the life context of the people we serve.Just in time for Mother’s day, this second edition takes you to Probolinggo, a city in East Java where we immerse ourselves in the lives of expectant mothers and healthcare providers to understand experiences of maternal health services from both sides of the service interface.The design research was conducted in advance of a service design bootcamp which PLJ facilitated jointly with the TRANSFORMASI programme. We uncovered five insights that help us to understand the behavior of expectant mothers (and healthcare providers) when it comes to managing pregnancy:Care for the heart: expectant mothers’ experience with healthcare providers is significantly influenced by how well they are treated. The emotional side of the experience is as important as the clinical care.Partner up: husbands give extra care for their pregnant wives, as long as it does not interfere with public perceptions of their “masculinity.”Risk and reward: there is a tendency among expectant mothers to avoid knowing more about the state of their pregnancy if it is classified as high risk.Persuade the inner circle: expectant mothers place more value on the advice of their parents and friends than on the sound medical opinion of healthcare specialists.Lighten the load: due to the highly centralized approach, healthcare providers have to spend a significant amount of time completing forms.Pulse Stories 02: Mother’s LovePulse Stories capture the anecdotes and inspiration gathered during Pulse Lab Jakarta’s field trips to different parts of Indonesia. We hope that overtime, these stories form patterns that will inspire our data innovations and the development of tools for public administrators.Data Innovation and Participatory Design: A Mash-up for Urban DevelopmentPulse Lab JakartaFollowOct 23, 2015 · 3 min readLast weekend Pulse Lab Jakarta hosted a session at the Asia-Pacific Urban Forum for Youth 2015 called Creating Cities for Everyone with Data Innovation and Participatory Design. A few notes from the event follow.Pimping Your CityThe session highlighted the emergence of bottom-up data capture and participatory design processes that are empowering communities and better informing urban planning. But to attract the attention of the youthful forum participants we transformed Creating Cities for Everyone with Data Innovation and Participatory Design into #PimpMyCity.The session was structured as discussion between the five diverse speakers with the audience raising questions through the hashtag on social media. We were graced by the company of:Ahmad Rifai, Executive Director at Solo Kota Kita FoundationDr. Ying Long, Founding Director of Beijing City LabGugun Muhammad, Urban Poor Consortium (UPC)Mizah Rahman, Co-Founder of Participate in Design (P!D)Oshean Lee Garonita, Metropolitan Manila Development AuthorityCreating Cities with EveryoneWhen speaking of creating a city for everyone, there is a tendency for a ‘planning elite’ to take the lead. In a collaborative process, we shift from ‘designing a city for everyone’ to ‘creating a city with everyone’, combining both top-down and bottom-up approaches to understand the complex and evolving city system.Mizah highlighted the complementarity of ethnography and data innovation, adding that stories offer meaning and context to the trends captured by the data. But, alas, it is not always easy to combine datasets, because, as Dr. Ying highlighted, big data is rarely open and open data is rarely big.Gugun pointed out that open source and affordable technologies are empowering communities to develop highly relevant and granular data on their shared spaces and lived experiences. This is helping to address the data quality issues afflicting governments which was highlighted by Oshean.Ahmad added that the validity of ‘bottom-up’ data collection processes is time and time again being demonstrated by urban communities, but that regulatory regimes make it difficult for governments to use the data. The audience agreed.Empowerment is KeyAlas, it is hard to capture the depth of the discussion in a blog and we have certainly not done the speakers justice. But the questions and ideas flowing on Twitter was evidence that youth are more than ready to be engaged in collaborative processes of urban development.The key point of the session was to highlight that while many different approaches to blending data innovation and participatory design exist within this space, the objective is the same: creating informed and empowered citizens and communities, both capable of better understanding themselves and of influencing decision-making processes.Pulse Lab Jakarta is grateful for the generous support from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Government of Australia.Top image: The panel relaxing after the discussion [Mellyana Frederika/UN Global Pulse, 2015]Pulse Lab Jakarta, with the support of DFAT, recently teamed up with GiZ to deliver a couple of health service design workshops in East Java, Indonesia. We find these kinds of workshops useful for identifying data innovation opportunities in frontline services and sub-national public administrations. We share what we learned from the experience below.Prep YourselfGet to know as much as you can about the challenge to be addressed, and translate your findings into a set of design prompts or inspirations that you can showcase early on at the workshop. This kind of preparation helps us all to better understand the challenges, opportunities and incentives facing people on either side of the public service interface.We find that showing the participants that we have done our homework helps to establish credibility, gives the participants some loose structure to which they can hold and, later on, smooths the transition to the research phase of the workshop.Respect the CultureUnderstanding cultural nuances that may hinder us from capturing meaningful stories is essential for facilitators. During a series of interviews at a local health clinic, we observed that pregnant mothers were much more reluctant to talk to the male workshop participants (not a huge surprise, but we should have seen this coming).Another example relates to the feedback that we received post-workshop in a Moslem-dominated area, where one of the biggest complaints was the insufficiently equipped prayer facility in the workshop space. Get these things right so that the participants can focus on what is important.Leave your Professional Identity at the DoorThe hierarchical nature of government naturally leads to situations where one opinion carries more weight than others. Labelling of government officials also creates a natural barrier for meaningful conversations with citizens.We found that requiring the participants to forgo their corporate attributes, like uniform, especially when conducting fieldwork, built trust within the teams and with citizens during interviews. It is amazing to see how a simple act, such as banning uniform, has an impact on people’s openness to connect and expose their true feelings.Onboard CreativitySelling creativity in this particular type of workshop can have a negative effect on the participants’ enthusiasm. Most of them did not feel that they are creative (we beg to differ!), but more dangerously, many did not think that creativity is a relevant skill in their work.We found, during the first workshop, that forcing participants to do an intense and unfamiliar creative task right away makes them see service design approach as something anecdotal, a perception which sometimes lasted until the end of the workshop. This is not to say that we should eliminate creative exercises from the workshop, but, instead, that they should be introduced in digestible chunks.Give them a taste of the whole shebangMany public officials are accustomed to a governance model that encourages linear thinking, that has little quarter for creativity. To public officials accustomed to structure and hierarchy, design thinking can feel chaotic and, thus, demotivate engagement in such an approach. We have found that participants in our workshops, at least initially, find it hard to see its relevance to their day-to-day work.We have found it useful to run a quick exercise early on in the workshop that gives the participants a taste of the methodology, and thus of everything to come. Let them go through an entire design cycle on an unrelated topic and without having to acknowledge the lingo. We use the gift-giving exercise developed by the d.school at Stanford.Beware though, this is not a silver bullet, as feedback shows that participants find this exercise to be the most confusing part of the workshop. But at least it let them experience the highs and lows of the methodology connected to an unrelated topic and it pays dividends later because once the participants are exposed to the design challenge they have an ‘anchor’ amid the ‘chaos’.Structure, Structure, Structure!As most public officials are accustomed to structure, a workshop programme with good structure on paper but following design principles is easier to digest. Based on our user research we developed themes and scenarios to help the participants structure their thoughts. We created these in a way that suggested, but did not dictate, creative direction.Some participants ignored these and followed their own research insights which was good to see, while others augmented our scenarios with insights of their own.We found that each group relied heavily on its facilitator. Floating facilitation and self-guided work is possible in follow-up workshops, but not recommended for participants new to the approach.Rethinking CollaborationOne of the strengths of design thinking lies in its focus on collaboration across disciplines. But for this to work it requires that participants are interested in collaborating with people from different backgrounds. We have found this to be challenging for some public officials, especially if they have been selected to participate rather than volunteer.We recommend that participants are able to self-select and, thus, that the multidisciplinary nature of teams comes a distant second to public officials’ motivation to participate.Design for ImplementationWorking on issues and priorities that already have political traction increases the likelihood that the prototypes developed and tested at the workshop will be implemented.Post-workshop facilitation is also critical. This could be through a follow up workshop with relevant staff in the host agency or institution so that they embrace the open and iterative approach to public sector reform and the prototype itself. It could also be through ad hoc support such as lobbying, grants, mentoring or networking, among others.Data Innovation in MindPulse Lab Jakarta uses design thinking to uncover data innovation opportunities as well as to develop new initiatives. A similar exercise in NTB Province uncovered the fact that midwives are required to complete over nine data artefacts connected to their work. Clearly form filling distracts from delivering services to citizens and communities.Together with midwives and the Vihara Innovation Network, PLJ developed and tested a new data collection and management system. The prototype rationalised the overlapping data collection processes and helped health clinics to use the data they collect in decision- making.We would love to hear from others working in this field, especially if you have experience integrating design thinking into institutional planning processes.Pulse Lab Jakarta is grateful for the generous support from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Government of Australia.PLJ Diaries: Discussing Data Privacy in The HaguePulse Lab JakartaFollowNov 9, 2015 · 3 min readLast week I had the pleasure of attending the very first Annual Meeting of UN Global Pulse Privacy Advisory Group. The meetings took place in the fantastically appropriate setting of the International City of Peace and Justice in The Hague, Netherlands, hosted by Leiden University. This was the first time the Privacy Advisory Group, which is a group of 24 privacy experts from a vast array of backgrounds and geographies met face to face with the objective of helping catalyze the ecosystem around big data for development and humanitarian action.The two days of discussions and plenary sessions were at first a little daunting for the non-legal experts present as data privacy and protection are highly technical. However, it quickly transpired that regulatory frameworks across the globe are trailing the advances in technology and undoubtedly there was much to discuss. Questions were posed about the risks associated with the use of big data, and how to evaluate the benefits of using data in certain scenarios in proportion to those risks?During one of the working sessions of the Group, all participants were presented with case studies of current Global Pulse projects and asked to fill out a Big Data Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) taking into consideration examples of using public social media, radio content and aggregated mobile data for development and humanitarian causes. The PIA can be used to assess risks, understand utility, legitimate aim and proportionate use of big data when evaluating a potential project in the global development or humanitarian context. It raises not only legal and privacy related concerns but it also integrates considerations from technical, engineering and policy perspectives. As part of the review of the draft PIA, participants also explored questions that relate to the use of de-identified and aggregated data for a specific purpose, considering potential violations of human rights or other misuses of data along with the risks of not using data in a particular context. Points with regard to remedy mechanisms have also come up. The PIA will be revised with all the feedback and comments gathered from the participants and the final version of the PIA will be shared widely with UN agencies, research and public sector.My colleague and I were delighted to participate on behalf of Pulse Lab Jakarta, and we were even more pleased to have been joined by five guests from Indonesia including two representatives from government (Bappenas), two representatives from the Indonesian telecommunications regulator (BRTI) and an expert from academia (UNPAD) who is assisting the drafting of Indonesia’s new data privacy law. They attended the meeting as observers, and were able to contribute very practical expertise and perspectives.We look forward to taking what we learned from this meeting and applying it to the Indonesia context. To continue the dialogue, Pulse Lab Jakarta will be hosting our own data privacy seminar in Indonesia.Overall what I took from these meetings is that data privacy and data protection is an important matter that requires further investivation, particularly when it comes to the uses of big data in humanitarian and development contexts. Certainly, more guidance and practical solutions are needed. I am very proud that our organization considers data privacy a priority area, and ensures that data is handled in a responsible and lawful manner. Big congratulations to our colleagues in New York for organizing this really important meeting. Where are we meeting next?http://www.unglobalpulse.org/discussing-data-privacy-hagueHack with GovPulse Lab JakartaFollowNov 18, 2015 · 1 min readThe word ‘hackathon’ is no longer a stranger to the techies and public officials of Indonesia, particularly in tech-hubs like Jakarta, Bandung and Yogyakarta. There have been around ten hackathons utilizing public data in Indonesia over the past two years which created significant impact on the nation’s civic-tech timeline.As another effort towards tech-savvy government, PLJ is hosting a seminar and hackathon with the theme “Empowering Indonesia” that will take place on November 27th-29th at Gajah Mada University and Eastparc Hotel in Yogyakarta. This particular hackathon focuses on three problem statements articulated by the Ministry of National Development Planning (Bappenas) which will be released at the start of the hackathon.#HackGov Seminar and Hackathon Schedule“Berdaya Bersama untuk Indonesia / Empowering Indonesia”For more info and to register please follow @hack_gov and visit http://www.hackwithgov.comColossal forest and peatland fires in Indonesia have polluted many parts of Southeast Asia, resulting in extensive environmental destruction, increasing health problems, school closures and transport cancellations.Pulse Lab Jakarta has been involved in research initiatives on forest and peatland fire management, as well as in understanding the social and economic impact of the phenomenon on populations in haze-prone areas in Indonesia.Keep a sharp eyeThis year NASA satellites have detected nearly 116,000 fires in Indonesia, emitting carbon at a rate of 15–20 million tons per day at their peak. The image of southern Sumatra and Borneo above, collected by the Terra satellite on 24th September, shows the density of the haze and the scale of the challenge.Practical monitoring tools are a prominent source of information. Global Forest Watch uses high resolution satellite imagery, among other methods, to detect fires in near-real-time and has initiated a campaign with Tomnod that allows people everywhere to support the research. These tools provide easy mediums for understanding the scale and environmental impact of the fires.In 2014, Pulse Lab Jakarta (PLJ) conducted research in collaboration with the UN Office for REDD+ Coordination in Indonesia (UNORCID) investigating whether social media can be used in forest and peat land fire management. The study concluded that analysis of social media could make significant contributions to emergency response activities.Currently, PLJ is following up the research initiative with UNORCID by investigating the health impacts of haze-affected populations, as articulated by social media, and exploring how haze influences people’s movements. This research will be published in 2016.Maximize the other nine monthsIn September 2015, our ethnographer went on a field trip to Pontianak, in West Kalimantan Province, and uncovered not just the social and economic impact of the haze but also the local gems that have been working on long-term solutions to the issue.The researcher found a sense of frustration and powerlessness within and among haze-affected communities. Evidence of transport cancellations and knock on effects such as food and water undersupply and associated price increases were apparent. The study is important in that it captures the human stories behind the trends and anomalies contained within the social media data.Hazed and Confused from PulseLabJakartaIn May 2015, President Joko Widodo decided to extend Indonesia’s forest and peatland moratorium programme established in 2011 which demonstrates the political will from central government in securing the future of the forests and peat lands.But top-down policy, as robust as it can be in a country the size of Indonesia, can only achieve limited success. It is critical to support the local champions in creating bottom-up responses to the crisis.Blog on Global Pulse’ websitePulse Lab Jakarta is grateful for the generous support from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Government of Australia.Top image: Fire locations and haze in Sumatra and Kalimantan, 24/9/2015 [MODIS Rapid Response Team/NASA, 2015]Getting to know the usersAs with all human-centred design projects, we begin by trying to understand of the life context of those we are designing for. We talked to road users — not just users of public transport, but also private vehicle users and public transport drivers, and tried to gain a better understanding of both their transport preferences and their mobility patterns. By widening our scope to understand people’s mobility habits and patterns, we discovered opportunity areas through which public transport services can be shaped to better adapt to the needs of the citizens.For instance, our observation revealed that people in Makassar prefer using private vehicles mainly because it is perceived as an easier and faster way to reach their destination. People without access to private vehicles opt for informal public transportation that offer the same advantages, such as bentor (motorised rickshaws), motorcycle taxis or taxis. These modes of transport operate without routes and thus can take passengers from door to door. The current public transport route, however, is unable to provide the same service. Public transport usually operates on main streets, so using this often requires walking a fair distance or combining it with other modes of transport. Based on this insight, one of the conceptual prototypes that came from the project was a feeder system that utilises idle public transportation vehicles to connect commuters from their homes to other transport modes and public spaces, such as malls, markets, and schools. The teams also came up with ideas for ancillary services to improve user experience, such as provision of wi-fi in terminals and an e-ticketing service that allows commuters to pay just once for a whole day’s trip.Another insight from the user research was that people’s mobility preferences and habits are largely occasion-driven. During peak commuting hours, timeliness is a more important factor than comfort and safety, while during the weekends, people place more importance on comfort over any other aspects. This insight then became the basis of two ideas to improve the public transportation system. One idea involved designing a system to help users plan their commutes better — this could involve online and offline platforms providing real-time information on traffic conditions and vehicle arrivals. Another idea was to repurpose existing public transport vehicles to further improve the comfort of public transport passengers. At present, pete-pete — the minivans that are the most commonly used public transportation in Makassar — roam the city with only a few passengers at a time, prompting many of the drivers to drive recklessly in their pursuit of picking up passengers. Our assumption is that if the pete-pete can be repurposed in a way that guarantees a steady flow of passengers, there will be less drivers fighting for passengers, thereby improving traffic flow by decreasing stop times. One prototype that came out of this insight was Pasikola, a concept of repurposing the pete-pete as a vehicle to transport students between the schools and their homes. This way, idle vehicles can be put to effective use, while the designated routes can prevent drivers from aggressively competing against one another for passengers. To make this prototype work, though, we would need a few enabling factors, including the encouragement of behavioural change for drivers through campaigns and initiatives.Uncovering new opportunitiesThese prototypes were the product of a collaboration that emerged through a multi-stakeholder design workshop facilitated by PLJ, UNDP, and BaKTI. The workshop adopted a human-centred design approach, and was attended not only by representatives from transportation agencies, but also practitioners from creative sector, businesses, and startup communities. Through the process of insight mining, ideation, fieldwork, prototyping, and testing, participants were exposed directly to the users of the proposed solutions, enabling them to design solutions that responded directly to the needs of citizens in Makassar.Pulse Lab Jakarta was recently in Papua Province with the LANDASAN team from KOMPAK looking at the data and information systems behind frontline services. Below we share some of the stories from both sides of the service interface and our thoughts on the challenges to digital transformation of the public sector in Indonesia.It’s 11 am in the civil registry office in Papua, the furthermost eastern province of Indonesia. Papua’s breathtaking, one-of-a-kind views also come with consequences. Access is limited in most parts of the province, and while infrastructure has improved, reliable communications connections are yet to reach rural areas.Back in the civil registry office, it was suffocatingly hot; a couple of dozen citizens, most carrying a look of confusion, were standing outside.“I need the papers as they are a requirement for applying for school for my daughter,” says one woman. “I’ve spent so much money already staying in the city, as we live so far from here,” she adds.Suddenly a commotion rose from within the queue. A middle-aged man yells at the registrars, “I came all the way here to collect my family card and you’re now telling me that I can’t have it because of wrong information?!”Many citizens headed home frustrated, some with and some without the documents they sought. Some had traveled far, and despite the service being free of charge, there were significant financial and opportunity costs incurred.Beginning the journey…Through observation and interviews, we mapped the journey that citizens typically navigate when registering for national ID cards, family cards, and birth certificates. We identified their actions and emotions at each of the service touchpoints, as well as the actions of the civil registrars.The automation of the national ID card and the family card, for example, has taken the service further away from citizens. Registration processes that used to take place at either the level of subdistricts or villages now have to be delivered in district administrations, a more remote level of governance. It is evident that the pursuit of automation has come at a cost to service access and experience.What was interesting for our stakeholders was the insight that the beginning of citizen’s service journey does not start with the moment they step into the civil registry office. It starts with a need. Such as the need to apply to school, to request a loan, or to travel.The frustrations we heard in the queue actually start far before citizens get to the office: from knowing which source of information to believe, to finding long-lost documents, to traveling to the city.By visualising the whole journey, we obtained a better understanding of what and how citizens feel throughout the process. We identified ‘pain points’ at each of the service interfaces, and came up with opportunity areas to improve the process for the benefit of citizens. The key differentiating factor here is that we started by understanding citizens’ needs and feelings, then figured out ways for the service to fit this context.The tech fix?The day after our conversation with the people in the civil registry queue, we sat down with one of the subdistrict heads for a conversation over coffee.“We need an information system — maybe a dashboard,” the Subdistrict Head said, “so that it would be easier for us to understand the conditions of the different villages within this district.”When we asked how having this kind of information would help the subdistrict do its work, the answer implied more complex underlying reasons:“Now, all of the information is at the village level, because the resources are there. But where does the information go? It should go to us.”But why?“So that when people like you come to visit, we will have something good to show.”This sentiment keeps cropping up during our work on frontline services in different parts of Indonesia. The excitement and novelty of having a technological solution, such an app or a dashboard, often outpaces considerations around the broader organisational, social or cultural context.Good stuff exists, but…Following our conversation with the Subdistrict Head, we were curious to see the reality of village data and information systems.A relatively rigorous data collection system does indeed exist: village governments collect and regularly update detailed demographic and socio-economic data, which the administrators highlight are more accurate than the national statistics as they are not sample-based.We were also impressed that the data is actually used for the planning and budgeting of village funds, as well as the day-to-day administrative needs of citizens.But there is still a gap between the data collection system and the technological, administrative and organisational capacities necessary to obtain optimum benefit from the data.For example, the entire database is stored on one computer; most of the administrators do not know how to utilise the database apart from querying the standard user interface; and those that can navigate the user interface do not know how to troubleshoot, how to train others, or how to interpret the data beyond the standard aggregation templates.Context, context, contextYet the very existence of the database was a clear asset, and as designers, we try to see every challenge as an opportunity. So from our conversations with the subdistrict and village administrators we tried to envision the “ideal ecosystem,” which focused not only on what the technology solutions would look like, but also on what the enabling factors would be.Using insights derived from the research, we tried to map the ideal learning experience, answering questions including: how do I benefit from the system? How do I best process information? How do I learn and react? How do I know that I’m doing the right thing? How do I share my learning with others?Instead of focussing on the look, feel and function of the information system requested by the Subdistrict Head, we thought it more important to gain as many insights as possible during the field mission to help us create onboarding strategies, think of creative ways to deliver training, identify how to sustain people’s motivation to use and develop the system, create feedback mechanisms that should be in place, and other “fluffy” — but contextually significant — stuff.Because at the end of the day, what we need to craft is not a database, not a dashboard, not an information system, but a meaningful user experience — be it to improve civil registration, or to enable a district or village administrator to use the public database to its full potential.And it is fundamental that we do this together with the users and providers of a service, as they know their context best.Rethinking the problemRecent policies have been developed to intensify national efforts in preventing the fires that induce haze. The Indonesian government has taken accountability measures to investigate and arrest corporate executives that show strong connection with fires, and at one point has issued a moratorium on new peatland development following the 2015 crisis. Traditionally, the root cause of the issue has been linked to lax policy measures in place to prevent slash-and-burn practices. Yet, we have identified a different angle to the problem. An aspect untouched by efforts of fire prevention and enforcement, and one that addresses the real societal impact of the haze crisis — on health, education, and access to information.We gathered a series of qualitative studies undertaken by UNICEF and RCA, and combined them with our own fieldwork results to reveal a more complex cause behind the issue. Slash-and-burn practices have been linked to corporations within the affected areas, but a more human-centered approach reveals that pain points and opportunity areas exist in the everyday environment for the everyday people. For instance, residents in affected areas adamantly refuse to use masks during the haze, citing lack of comfort as the main reason. Yet, we found a few potential agents of change that strive to work around this pain point, including a local university professor who is in the process of making a sustainable and affordable air-filtration system for homes.While initiatives have been poured into tackling the environmental side of the issue, not many have effectively addressed the behavioural aspect of the crisis. And while those that are most affected by the crisis are everyday residents, their stories have rarely been taken into account in policy-making.Using this lens, the issue that we wanted to explore further was not why the haze crisis happens, but why society allows it to persist. For instance, why do residents feel that their main burden from the haze is their lack of mobility rather than their persistent respiratory problem? Why do social media conversations thrive but actions remain passive? Why are schools closed during bad periods of haze, and yet children are still allowed to play outside? These are the issues we aimed to explore further during the workshop, and find potential solutions for.Different strokesBecause our jump-off point is to understand human perceptions behind haze, for this initial workshop we decided to invite a slightly different crowd in addition to development practitioners: we welcomed creative consultants, designers, engineers, and marketing experts — those who are well experienced in discerning behavioural insights and translating its nuances into actionable messages.We hoped that having these kinds of expertise alongside our domain experts and development practitioners would provide a new, innovative way of seeing things. One that addresses the behavioural aspect of the crisis, a shift away from technicalities.Participants were divided into 6 groups, each with an equal proportion of strategists, designers, industry experts, and development practitioners to bring ideas to life while at the same time ground them to ensure actionable implementation.The Australia Indonesia Partnership for Economic Governance (AIPEG) and Pulse Lab Jakarta recently teamed up to conduct a study on how business registration works in Indonesia. While previous studies on business registration mostly focused on the administrative parts of the system, we wanted to focus on the experience of entrepreneurs as they navigate the business registration process.Welcome to the fourth edition of Pulse StoriesIndonesia is ranked 109th out of 189 countries in the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business Index, and 173rd in the indicator for starting a business. In response, the President of Indonesia has targeted an improvement of Indonesia’s ranking to 40th and the Government of Indonesia issued the 12th Economic Policy Package in April 2016.This reform package has taken an axe to the procedures, processing time, costs, permits, and amount of seed capital required to start a business. It is in the context of this ongoing reform process that we went out to listen and to learn from people at the front line of service delivery.After dozens of discussions with entrepreneurs and other stakeholders, insights and themes emerged that highlight the impact of the business registration system. So join us on a rollercoaster ride of emotions as we navigate the experiences of people on both sides of the service interface.Please feel free to download a copy.Pulse Stories capture the anecdotes and inspiration gathered during research trips to different parts of Indonesia. We hope that over time these stories inspire change.GiZ and Pulse Lab Jakarta recently teamed up to deliver a service design workshop for educators in South Sulawesi, Indonesia. Below, we share the insights generated by the design research conducted in advance of the workshop in Jeneponto.Welcome to the third edition of Pulse StoriesOne of our design principles is to put citizens at the centre of our innovation processes. Pulse Stories is part of our work to better understand the life context of the people we serve.For our third edition we take you to Jeneponto, a regency in South Sulawesi where we immerse ourselves in the lives of school pupils, school dropouts and educators to understand experiences of the education system.The design research was conducted in advance of a service design bootcamp which GiZ and PLJ facilitated jointly with the TRANSFORMASI programme. We uncovered four design prompts that informed the workshop:School to inspire role models: how might schools provide opportunities for kids to broaden their aspirations?School as a dream enabler: how might schools help students to deal with barriers to achieving their dreams?Rethinking the value of punishment: how might punishment be reshaped as a positive feedback mechanism that can promote confidence and intrinsic motivation?School as a space for playful learning: how might we utilise kids’ desire to be social and to play to create more meaningful learning experiences?Pulse Stories capture the anecdotes and inspiration gathered during Pulse Lab Jakarta’s field trips to different parts of Indonesia. We hope that, over time, these stories form patterns that will inspire our data innovations and the development of tools for public administrators.Meet Anda and Abraham, a Couple of Tech Entrepreneurs Working to Improve Maternal Health in IndonesiaPulse Lab JakartaFollowOct 28, 2016 · 3 min readAnda Sapardan, Dr. Ari Waluyo, and Abraham AuzanTele-CTG, a low-cost cardiotocograph (CTG), captured the attention of IdeaFest. I recently caught up with Anda Sapardan and Abraham Auzan, the founders, to learn more about their story and plans for the future.What inspired you to create Tele-CTG?For an emerging middle-income country, the maternal and infant mortality rate in Indonesia is quite high. Part of this issue can be attributed to the absence of good healthcare diagnostics in remote areas. For example, cardiotocographs (CTG) are only available in health centres in big cities. Also, the outputs of conventional CTGs devices can only be read by obstetricians. With approximately five million expectant mothers to serve, Indonesia’s stock of around 3,500 obstetricians struggle to meet demand.Based on these problems, in late 2015, Dr. Ari Waluyo and I [Anda] prototyped Tele-CTG, a portable and considerably more cost-effective device. By integrating the device with smartphones, we are able to connect midwives and nurses in remote districts with obstetricians in cities in order to accelerate assessment and diagnosis.Tele-CTG is undergoing a clinical trial at the moment in Puskesmas Kuningan Barat in Jakarta under the Ministry of Health’s supervision.How Tele-CTG works. Source: www.telectg.co.idWhat’s the hardest part of setting up an enterprise?We have ten people in our Tele-CTG team — most of them are either tech developers or obstetricians. It is great to work with a diverse and passionate team, but it has been difficult to find hardware engineers in Indonesia and it has taken us a lot of time to develop this device. Another challenge came in the form of paperwork, especially the registration process for licensing Tele-CTG. That was tough.What’s next for Tele-CTG?Currently we are working with the Association of Laboratory and Health Equipment Enterprises (Gakeslab Indonesia) on the distribution of Tele-CTG. We are also in the process of establishing a command centre together with the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Indonesia, in order to build a network of obstetricians across Indonesia who can interpret the data feeds from Tele-CTG.The next step is to provide Tele-CTG devices to health centers on the islands of Java and Kalimantan. We hope that by using Tele-CTG, people who live outside urban areas in Java can have better access to maternal healthcare diagnostics.What advice would you give to people who have bright ideas for social good, and want to act on them?[Anda Sapardan] If you want to do something good for people, you have to think about the impact for society. Don’t start with the aim of making profit. Be patient and well prepared when things don’t seem as good as you would have expected.[Abraham Auzan] Young people have so many ideas but the one who makes a difference is the one who implements the idea. What matters more than coming up with new ideas is to implement them, and it takes courage to take risks and be adaptive.Data Science Indonesia is a community working to advance data innovation across the nation. Earlier this month I caught up with Fajar Jaman, one of the founders, to learn more about the network and its plans for the coming years.What inspired you to establish Data Science Indonesia?When I was working in Teradata, I was tasked to explore open data opportunities and to map the market in Indonesia. I was lucky to have my work align perfectly with my passion. I had a dream to initiate a community for data professionals who want to contribute to social projects.I realised this dream in May 2015. We started with 30 members predominantly drawn from tech organisations, but now our community stands at 600 people including scientists, artists, civil servants, academics and students.How does the network function? And how do you choose your projects?To become the centre of excellence for data science in Indonesia we developed three streams of activities, namely education, socialisation and advocacy. For example, earlier this year we organised Data Science Bootcamp, a six-month training programme for professionals including instruction in the basics of data science from experts in the telecommunications and consulting industries, as well as a course project or internship.In terms of socialisation and advocacy we are active at events like Asia Open Data Hackathon with government agencies from Thailand and Taiwan, SciFi IoT Hackathon with Makedonia and Dattabot, and Data Science Weekend with UII, Google, Cloudera and many more. We also publish articles and work with media partners to promote the discipline.To date we have collaborated with Perludem, Amartha Finance, Hivos, WikiDPR and Jakarta Smart City and will collaborate in the near future with Cloudera, Google and other public and private sector organisations. We recently signed an MoU with TELKOM as an official community partner. Through these partnerships, we are able to explore and utilise data or platforms for the purposes of data science education and social research.What is your most interesting project at the moment?We host one big event each year. And this year, in collaboration with many public and private sector partners, we will organise Data Science Weekend from 3rd to 5th December 2016 in Yogyakarta.There will be more than 30 speakers at Data Science Weekend as well as concerts, an exhibition and a camp & jam among other activities. The exhibition will showcase data products and projects and we invite everyone to submit their data innovations. We will showcase the best 20 data-driven projects in the form of visualisations during the exhibition.What does the future hold for data science in Indonesia and for Data Science Indonesia?In the next one to two years, there will be a big demand for data scientists in Indonesia, especially from sectors such as banking, telecommunication and digital start-ups. It is an exciting time for aspiring data scientists. As DSI, we would like to develop more data science talent to realise this opportunity.Regarding Data Science Indonesia, we are considering several organisational models in order to ensure the sustainability of the community. The first model is a platform to connect industry, projects and data science talent from across the region. The second model involves the development of a data platform to host shared data from the public and private sectors, which will have a similar concept to Kaggle, to democratise access to the data; however the platform would only be accessible to curated members of DSI to facilitate their training and exploratory endeavours.What advice would you give to organisations who want to become more data savvy?Well, our advice is to start small, with an impactful business case, before exploring bigger data problems. It is good practice to develop the skills of a team in-house and to familiarise them with the data exploration process.Bandung City Government invited Pulse Lab Jakarta to collaborate in hosting Bandung Innovation Jam. Below, we share some impressions of the event and thoughts on the future of public sector innovation in local government.“In my 20 years working as a civil servant, I have never experienced an innovation process like this,” said Ibu Iis, a Bandung Social Security Office employee. “To fix problems that we have been facing for ages, we need to shift away from a top-down approach and embrace a more ground-up approach, and this workshop is a step forward in doing that,” she adds.Ibu Iis is one of twelve civil servants who participated in the Bandung Innovation Jam, a human-centered design workshop where participants go to urban communities to test and develop ideas to improve public services.From public administration to public serviceThe ubiquity of public feedback platforms for citizens to air their opinions around programmes and projects led by government institutions may at times contribute to a default perception that government institutions are unresponsive to citizens’ needs.But that is not the case and through our work with government officials, we have encountered many civil servants who are smart, passionate, caring, and who genuinely want to improve how services work. Many struggle with what they perceive as structural impediments and resource constraints to improving services.Our experience during the Bandung Innovation Jam confirms the value of working with citizens to think about problems differently, generate ideas for change, and test concepts for public service reform quickly and cheaply.User research — a good reality check.Crowdsourcing service designsThe ideas that were tested and iterated during the innovation jam came from iuran.id, an idea crowdsourcing platform developed by the Bandung City Government. Sixteen ideas were shortlisted, and during the workshop the participants created prototypes and tested them with service users.During the workshop we encouraged the participants, comprising civil servants, creatives, students, engineers, and social entrepreneurs, to validate their assumptions by talking to Bandung residents. They used the prototypes they created as a way to understand the behavior of people when experiencing services.Prototype to communicate.When assumptions meet realityOne of the groups worked on the concept of an ambulance motorcycle to provide emergency medical services. When testing the idea with a passersby, they discovered that people rarely use ambulance services because they are perceived to be too complicated. The team also talked to emergency medical service providers; they discovered that the emergency number rarely gets any calls, and when it does, the service provider has no way to validate the report. The team shifted direction, from focusing on the design of the motorcycle ambulance, to designing an emergency medical service system that is accessible and that users can trust.Another team tested the idea of a Bandung Information Centre which was originally conceived as a physical space for tourists to get information. But based on feedback from users, beyond knowing where to go, tourists want experiences that fit their interests. The team shifted to a network model for the service, namely connecting volunteer residents with tourists with similar interests. By focussing on real needs, the team created a new model for service delivery.In testing their ideas, the participants were trained to focus on the usefulness and the user experience rather than the novelty of the concept. They learned to reframe their solutions to address the root cause of the problem, rather than relying on their own assumptions. In other words, the participants learned to connect public services with what citizens really need.Testing ideas out on the streets.Vision for a city“I will share my experience with my supervisor and I really hope that we do more human-centered approaches,” said Ibu Iis to close her sharing session.It was inspiring to experience the forward-looking and constructive approach of Bandung City Government officials, not only in terms of their strategic vision for a more human, livable city, but also for their openness to new approaches and to collaboration with diverse actors.This reflects a broader paradigm shift in local governance in Indonesia: increasingly government units and officials engage proactively with citizens and source new solutions to issues of public concern. What is becoming important now is how government units can sustain this citizen-centred approach, and spread the new models of public service delivery to other areas.This workshop was a start; it helped the Bandung City Government to capitalise on its most valuable assets: the creative energy, the goodwill, and the trust of its citizenry. The City Government selected three of the prototypes for adoption and Pulse Lab Jakarta will mentor the teams as they continue to refine the ideas. Some of the Dinas (Local Government Offices) representatives also expressed interest in organising similar workshops for their teams.Data innovation and data analytics offer an unprecedented opportunity for expanding the sources of evidence that can inform policy-making. But is data innovation threatening traditional policy research? Arnaldo Pellini is a Research Fellow at the Overseas Development Institute and the lead for learning at the Knowledge Sector Initiative, and Andrew Thornley is an Asia Foundation alum; both have a wealth of experience across Southeast Asia. They raise some important questions as they look at experiences in Indonesia.In the last five years, data innovation has changed the research and policy landscape. Policy-makers used to rely on more traditional forms of evidence, such as social science research, to make decisions. But new technologies and alliances for collecting, publishing and analysing data are changing the way policy-makers source and use evidence. We need to understand more about how data is being used in policy and what this means for social science researchers trying to inform policy decisions. Ultimately, social science research must adapt.What is data innovation?We are now able to collect much bigger data sets than traditional research. For example, new technologies enable us to collect large amounts of passive data, such as data collected by people using mobile phones or digitalised community radio.A lot more data is now open and free to be used and reused. We’re seeing more ‘open data labs’, ‘public private partnerships for data innovation’, ‘data innovation challenges’, ‘open data acceleration funds’ and ‘citizen monitoring marathons’.Data analysis is also more accessible. For example ‘data dives’ — often run by national statistics offices in partnership with the private sector — provide forums for people and organisations to get free support from expert data analysts.Data visualisation is changing the way we communicate data, making large data sets more useful. Interactive data visualisations, like this, even allow the user to engage or play with data in new ways.What does this mean for evidence-based policy-making?The availability and accessibility of new data clearly offers unprecedented opportunity for evidence-based policy-making. The sheer scale of datasets provides credibility that cannot be matched by traditional research methods and approaches. Moreover, data can be more citizen focused (derived from what citizens think and experience, how they move, where they move, and so forth); analysis delivered more quickly; and it’s often far cheaper than traditional research.But, while big data sets and analytics can identify correlations within data — and therefore help to identify problems or patterns in social behaviour — they struggle with causality and causation. In other words, they can’t tell you why something is happening and therefore are less helpful in finding ways to address the problems. Often the answers to the ‘why’ questions have to come from investing in research.Social science needs to adaptThe advance of big data and data analytics is unstoppable. With national and local governments embracing data innovation, social scientists will need to get on board. Chris Anderson (former editor-in-chief of WIRED) argues that big data has opened the door to making scientific research methodologies obsolete — no more need to formulate a hypothesis and test it. Kenneth Benoit and Kenneth Cukier argue that the social scientists should not oppose this change, but rather embrace it. Within the next 10 years social science researchers ‘have to know and understand coding’ or else be out of a job, they say.Indonesia is a good context to explore this further. It has a thriving civil society with a growing appetite for innovation, phenomenal social media use, and the Indonesian government is committed to open data at national and local levels.Pulse Lab Jakarta, a data innovation lab jointly launched by the United Nations and the Government of Indonesia is working closely with the Knowledge Sector Initiative, a knowledge to policy programme of the Governments of Indonesia and Australia to enhance the role of evidence based policy making. Three studies are being researched to identify the impact of data innovation and data analytics on policy and on traditional policy research in Indonesia. The case studies feature a monitoring system for patients of malaria in remote Indonesia, use of drones for monitoring the condition of agricultural crops and a citizen monitoring system developed by Pulse Lab Jakarta which is being used at national government level. The three case studies will look at how data analytics have been used by policy makers and how it has contributed to policy uptake. The studies will be published later this year — we’ll keep you posted on the findings.Pulse Lab Jakarta recently announced the results of the second consecutive big ideas competition, a challenge that we ran together with our great partners — UNDP Asia Pacific, UN Volunteers, the National Information Society Agency of the Republic of Korea and the Ministry for Science, ICT and Future Planning of the Republic of Korea.We were truly delighted with the number and calibre of applications for the competition from across the ASEAN member states and the Republic of Korea and the judges had a very tough task in selecting the winners.But we didn’t want to leave it there. PLJ has been expanding its work regarding sustainable cities and communities and is partnering with ambitious and dynamic city governments across Indonesia. We have been reminded of the vibrancy and creativity of Indonesia’s citizens through these competitions and we wanted to acknowledge the outstanding applications that we received from our home base in Indonesia.As a reminder, the competition was focused on attracting data-driven ‘big ideas’ to advance SDG 11 which focuses on sustainable cities and communities. City governments are very often well aware of the urban challenges that they face but sometimes lack the capacity to develop and implement technology-based solutions. PLJ and our partners were interested in hearing from the citizens on how their ‘big idea’ could contribute to making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable.The winners of the competition have received plenty of attention but we were particularly pleased with the quality and quantity of applications that came from within Indonesia. Since over 100 applications came from Indonesia, we thought it only fair to give a big shout out to the top 15 proposals that were submitted from Indonesia. These big ideas are all outstanding in their own right and they all deserve recognition. We as organisers of the competition want to congratulate all the applicants for dedicating the time to deliver top quality ideas which we hope can be prototyped, tested and maybe adopted in the near future.Top Ideas from IndonesiaIn the field of basic service deliveryTUNE Map: Crowdsourcing the Mapping of Accessible Pedestrian Routes for the Visually Impaired in Bandung, by Muhammad Malik Ar-Rahiem, Pravitasari, Gita Nofieka Dwijayati. The application has two main users, people with visual impairments as the beneficiaries, and Bandung citizens as the data collectors. Bandung citizens will report information about damaged pedestrian routes to the system. Once the reports have been validated by the system, it will provide suggestions on the safest pedestrian route for citizens with visual impairments. That report will also be sent to Bandung Command Centre to inform which pedestrian routes should be fixed urgently.Buckle: An Open Platform to Share Distribution Costs to Enhance Basic Delivery Systems in Yogyakarta, by Rahmat Nur Faizin, Fendi Rahmat Widianto, Dita Nurtjahya. The application aims to lower distribution costs for low-income commodity producers to minimize the inefficiency of the existing truck operation system in which trucks often travel empty after delivering products. The application allows users to track the routes of truck drivers and submit pickup requests detailing the type of commodity that needs to be delivered, pick up time, distribution cost, and delivery destination.Channel My Fund: One Stop Portal to Match CSR Funds with Stakeholders (Jakarta), by Aida Rezalina, Prasetya Dwichaya, Sheila Teta Carina. An online portal that matches companies who wish to channel their CSR funds with social organizations whose causes matches the companies’ CSR values. The portal also includes an analytics feature that prioritizes the socioeconomic problems in a particular area based on various sources to help companies decide how to better allocate their CSR funds.Discover: A Community-Based Platform to Improve Public Spaces and Services for People with Disabilities (Yogyakarta), by Andreas Gandhi Hendra Pratama, Ricky Julianjatsono, Fajri Nurwanto. An application with three main functions that helps people with disabilities to access public facilities: a ratings system of public accessibility for people with disabilities, a crowdfunding platform to improve public facilities, and a social medium for people with disabilities to communicate with people nearby in case of emergencies.Information System Database Optimization for ‘Kampung Kota’ Improvement (Bandung), by Luh Komang Wijayanti, Hanfie Vandanu, Tania Benita. To create an urban village index based on a) housing index created by Nababan and Kustiawan, b) crowdsourcing platform such as Qlue and LAPOR for citizen reporting. The index will be used by the government to prioritise and target urban village improvement programmes.As part of the efforts to improve the quality of data governance in Indonesia’s public sector, the Executive Office of the President (KSP) collaborated with Pulse Lab Jakarta (PLJ) ​​and Open Data Lab (ODL) to identify challenges that are likely to arise when implementation of the Presidential Regulation on Satu Data Indonesia begins. Understanding the journey of government data in Makassar and Kulon Progo, as well as gaining insights from the users were central to the initial analysis. The research results have thus formed the basis for guidelines that can help data stewards at the municipal/district level implement the policy.Using A User-Centred Design ApproachThe Government needs credible data to design public policies and to provide quality public services. The current system, however, is known for pain points of overlapping datasets, lack of data quality and difficulty in data sharing. The draft Presidential Regulation on Satu Data Indonesia seeks to overcome such challenges by establishing three principles for data governance in the public sector: one data standard, one standard metadata, and data interoperability. While the Regulation has not yet been passed, the central government acknowledges that this initiative can only be successful if data stewards in ministries and agencies across Indonesia understand and are equipped to implement effective data governance processes.Instead of coming up with possible solutions on our own, KSP, PLJ and ODL agreed to first survey how data stewards in local government carry out their duties. PLJ employed a user-centred design, a method that supports information gathering by way of empathy to understand the difficulties and challenges data stewards in the public sector face. We began the study by examining the current state of data governance at the district/municipal level, specifically in Makassar and Kulon Progo. We interviewed various data stewards, ranging from those at the provincial level to those working at community health centres (Puskesmas) in both cities.Based on our research, we have highlighted some key challenges:1. Data stewards tend to have other responsibilities alongside data governance. While these other duties are normally still connected to areas in the public sector, they reduce the amount of time data stewards have to specifically fulfill data-related activities.2. Inadequate coordination is common between levels and agencies within the public sector pertaining to the management and implementation of data governance procedures.3. Skills and knowledge needed to manage and interact with digital data are lacking. We also observed this in a previous study on how data is used at the village level.Addressing the ChallengesThese challenges demonstrate that data stewards in the public sector could benefit from easy-to-understand technical guidelines in order to effectively implement the new governance procedures. The Draft Presidential Regulation on Satu Data Indonesia proposes such guidance.We identified three areas that present opportunities to strengthen data governance in the public sector, and these are particularly useful for data stewards:● Organisational StructureAs mentioned prior, poor coordination between government entities is one of the difficulties data stewards continue to encounter. To improve this, clear guidelines on the organisational structure can clarify coordination procedures related to the governance of data. These guidelines may include a comprehensive explanation of the data coordination steps, how to match competent data stewards with a particular task, and how to go about organising a data governance forum among government stakeholders.● Data FlowIndeed, data stewards within the public sector understand the importance of maintaining data quality. Despite this, not all of them are fully aware of the necessary processes, going from the stage of data collection to the point of data usage in policy making. Guidelines that can translate this overall process into clear steps can help data stewards to better perform their duties. Specifically, we identified five segments of the data journey that can help actualise the Satu Data Indonesia policy. These segments include: data collection and distribution flow, standardisation flow, validation flow, interoperability flow, and the data dissemination flow.● Data FormatWe found that data stewards across agencies and ministries in the public sector do not have a single, common format for cataloguing digital data. As a result, individuals use whatever preferred formats, and this makes it less efficient when it comes to sharing data between government counterparts. The development of a standard data format guideline has the benefit of helping all players meet the interoperability principles outlined in Satu Data Indonesia, while simultaneously improving data management skills related to collecting, processing and distributing data. This guideline can also serve as a glossary of data terminologies, metadata format and data type format.Validating the Ideas with PrototypesFor opportunities to be useful within the public sector, they have to be carefully assessed and translated into tangible forms that allow users to see, feel and use them. Accordingly, KSP, PLJ and ODL prioritised these opportunity areas and developed three prototypes: 1) a diagram of data stewards and their related tasks, 2) a diagram of the flow of data collection and distribution, and 3) a Satu Data Dictionary to explain the terminologies used in data governance. These prototypes were selected based on the priority needs of the data stewards, as well as their feasibility to support the Draft Presidential Regulation on Satu Data.Our next blog in this Satu Data series looks at the results from the prototype testings, including users’ feedback. Keep watching this space for more information.Baca artikel ini dalam Bahasa Indonesia.Every so often, there is a desperate need for a loan when running a business. If you’re living in a metropolis, a handful of lending institutions may present themselves depending on your credit history. If you live in a rural community, on the other hand, and have never banked with a formal institution: what are your options for borrowing?In Ciseeng Village, Bogor, a mother running a small food shop (warung) found herself in such a situation a few years ago. Unable to maintain her shop, she was on the verge of calling it quits. And then, she met Andi Taufan Garuda Putra (Amartha’s founder and CEO) who agreed to lend her the money she needed. Blossoming from this and other initial loans into a financial technology (FinTech) start-up called Amartha, today, many people living in rural areas of Java rely on this peer-to-peer (P2P) lending institution for a way out of a tight spot.Last month, I sat down with Amartha’s vice president, Aria Widyanto, to learn more about its business model and ambitions.Q: What is Amartha?Amartha’s focus is on advancing financial services to micro and small business (UMKM) through a peer-to-peer business model in rural areas of Indonesia. Based on our social research and experiments, we believe poor people in rural areas need an easy access to funding and financial mentoring. Those two things are the core principles of Amartha. Despite starting off as a microfinance institution in 2010, Amartha today has transformed into a FinTech player. Our peer-to-peer business model complements our vision, because the model can connect more resources from the funding side, that way borrowers can have more opportunities to be funded. Previously, all of the funding came from Amartha directly, hence the number of loans were also limited in value. With our transformed model, sources of funding can come from many registered investors. Investors can choose directly which applicant to fund. Through the concept of peer-to-peer lending, Amartha expects this micro segment to become more modern and expand rapidly.Q: Who does Amartha target?Amartha’s main target group is working age mothers with dependents. Before deciding on a target area, we conduct research in the community that we are considering. We typically bypass villages that have been largely served by other financial institutions. Amartha does a demographic survey and market validation in areas that are below the poverty line and under-developed (and, especially, not served by conventional banking systems). Through research and discretion, we come up with a list of eligible borrowers. At this stage, we divide borrowers into groups and provide some with financial-related coaching. We also use our own personal credit scoring.Q: Can you describe the personal credit scoring?We created a unique model to analyse unbanked financial transactions to measure the creditworthiness of an applicant. Bank credit scoring is traditionally based on transaction history, which does not exist in our target areas. Therefore we developed an approach that blends demographic profiling and psychometric tests to model risks and determine the probability of repayment. By analysing the risks, we can then directly generate credit scores. This determines how much money the borrowers are eligible for and the credit tenure. For applicants who pass the selection steps, their data are uploaded to the Amartha platform — our marketplace — to be paired with investors/lenders.Q: How many investors do you have?Amartha’s vision is to be an informal bridge between lenders and borrowers, enabling affordable access to finance. Right now, we have more than 5000 investors registered in our system. They usually monitor the “to be funded” group daily via our marketplace. On average, around 90 percent of borrowers receive funding within a day. Investors agree to a profit-sharing scheme, with a 15–17 percent return. So, from the investment side, our model is also attractive. However, our challenge as a FinTech business is how to scale up quickly, because our focus is now in rural areas and some villages in Indonesia are difficult to reach. We also need to move faster to cover more areas so that we can serve more people. Therefore, part of our solution was to create technology-based products to help us operate more efficiently.Q: Is there any impact beyond the direct lending-borrowing model?Yes, Amartha produces an annual Social Accountability Report that measures certain poverty indicators before and after Amartha’s engagement with a community. In one case, we noticed that a particular family’s income increased by about 41 percent a year after receiving a loan. If this could be replicated across the country, we could help to decrease poverty at a faster rate and at the same time promote entrepreneurship. Since we have already covered all the provinces on the island of Java, our plan is to expand our services to all of Indonesia. This is a long term process obviously, so we need to scale up and enable more financial access to people living below the poverty line.Q: Any final words for social enterprises out there?Look around your surroundings more broadly; do not become complacent with what you already own. If you have an opportunity to travel and expand your customer base, do it, because it may allow you to encounter new ideas that can be developed into new products and businesses.Collaborative ResearchConsidering the Lab’s forte in data processing and data analytics and BAPPENAS’ domain expertise in economic planning, the directorates took the lead in designing and completing the substantive parts of the projects. Each of the directorates assigned two staff members to work closely with Pulse Lab Jakarta on each project. This approach turned out to be highly rewarding as it enabled knowledge exchange, information flow, skill-set complementarity and more straightforward discussions on the operational feasibility of each project.Some of the projects include:Building on our earlier nowcasting model to monitor food price dynamics, especially of priority commodities such as rice and beef, to provide early indicators if commodity price movement approaches maximum retail price and price variation coefficient.Trying out new data sources, such as e-commerce data, to use as proxies to map the state of the domestic economy.Testing assumptions of correlation between inflation rates and public sentiment of the increase in prices of certain commodities.Perception analysis of the “Wonderful Indonesia” brand and Indonesia’s flagship tourist destinations.The goal was to have research outputs that we could showcase towards the end of the year, so in late November, our joint research teams sat down to take stock of our progress. There was significant variation in terms of having “finished products” for each of the research topics. In some cases, we have had to modify and sharpen research questions again, and rerun the analysis. The project on inflation, for example, was still rough and in need of further iteration because we have yet to establish a formula that shows a strong correlation between inflation and people’s perception of commodity prices (visualisation can be found here).In other cases, such as exploring the use of e-commerce data, we’ve had to narrow the scope of analysis to something much more specific. We decided to focus on house price data across provinces and see whether we can gain insights from the comparison. While we did manage to clean the data and show the price dynamics pattern (visualisation here), the actual analytic part to correlate this to events, shocks or stresses, or other economic indicators is yet to be done. This is something we are keen on exploring further with the Bappenas team next year.Our Bappenas colleagues led the way in exploring the connections between digital footprints and other contextual datasets. For example, we worked with analysts from Bappenas’ Directorate for Industry, Tourism and Creative Economy to run a social media analysis of the “Wonderful Indonesia” campaign, comparing this to other campaigns of a similar nature. Bappenas’ analysts then combined this with their own data on strategies for promoting Indonesia’s tourism brand, including where and when promotional events were held. Using time-selected and geographically-selected analysis, the joint team uncovered new insights on the potential effectiveness of particular strategies.We think it is still too early to measure the value of the results, or to confidently state that the results will be utilised in policy formulation process by Bappenas as originally intended. Looking back, we feel that the most valuable outcome to emerge during these last few months was our counterparts’ genuine commitment to learn new approaches and to lead the analytical parts of these projects. Yes, the Lab played a large role in terms of methods to process the data, but our Bappenas colleagues led the way in making the outputs grounded, and gave them meanings, functions and context within each of their own development policy agenda.Amplifying lessons learnedThe intent was always to showcase the research results to other divisions in Bappenas as an example of how Big Data analytics could be used to inform development planning and policy formulation. The idea of doing this in a larger forum gained momentum when the Bappenas Minister expressed his enthusiasm for exploring the use of new data sources to complement conventional data sources. As we mentioned in the beginning of this blog, we worked with our counterparts in Bappenas to host a seminar where analysts from four different Directorates presented the results of their research to a broader Bappenas audience.Pulse Lab Jakarta’s role in this forum was to moderate the discussion and answer technical questions on data analytics. The bulk of the discussion, however, was between Bappenas sector experts, technical advisors, and policy analysts on how best to utilise new data sources to complement existing analysis on upcoming national planning priorities. In addition to discussing the benefits of integrating different data sources, it was also good to see a lively debate around the flaws and limitations of some of the approaches. Several members of the audience also raised the point that, although concepts like perception analyses can be useful if used appropriately, optimal use of Big Data analytics means looking beyond social media data and thinking critically about which data sources would yield the best insights.At the end of the discussion, the analysts shared some of their key takeaways from this entire process:Although policymakers need not master the more technical aspects of advanced data analytics, they need to have an inherent understanding of the principles — and more importantly, its limitations. This will help identify which knowledge gaps can be filled with exploratory data science, and which ones would be best met with other ways of obtaining evidence.Exploring whether new data sources can be used as indicators for specific economic conditions is an intensively iterative process. This requires not only substantive involvement of policymakers in the research process, but the flexibility to modify a line of inquiry when needed.The results from Big Data analytics is one of many inputs that may be used to inform policy processes. To use it optimally, it should be combined with other pieces of evidence that provide contextual depth to the policy issue at hand. In using results of data analytics, policymakers should also be cognisant of the limitations and inherent biases of the data sources that are being analysed.One final reflection….Moving forward, we feel that our role in building demand for data science within government is twofold. The first one is in helping to shape and to articulate the demand for the type of analytics that might yield the kind of insights that are needed. This includes suggesting possible methods for analysis, but it also includes being very honest about the feasibility of such an approach and, for exploratory research, the possibility of failure to gain any meaningful insights.The second role that we need to play is in expanding policymakers’ horizon of options on what is possible to do using data science. Doing this requires us to constantly push the boundaries of our own research and experimentation, and this is something that we very much look forward to doing next year.Bring on 2018!Oh, and we did do a recap of the highlights from our seminar with Bappenas — check out the video below.Some estimates for Greater Jakarta put the population at over 30 million. Within the boundaries of the city itself the transport system has to handle 1.38 million daily commuters. Policy makers need regular updates to track the rhythm of the city and best optimise public transport, so we teamed up with the Indonesian Institute of Statistics to look at whether data from social media could help.Transport policy in a megacityJabodetabek, as locals fondly refer to the megacity, includes the settlements of Jakarta, Bogor, Depok, Tangerang and Bekasi. Jakarta, itself, is split into five administrative cities: North, South, East, West and Central. Population estimates for the settlements range from 10 million for Jakarta, to over 30 million for the broader metropolitan area, also known as Greater Jakarta.The scale of the population and the state of the transport infrastructure makes the daily commute a common complaint among residents. The city administration is working to improve the commuting experience with significant investments being made in transport infrastructure, such as the new Jakarta MRT.To inform these infrastructure investments and to understand the rhythm of the city, the Indonesian Bureau of Statistics conducted the first Jakarta commuting survey in 2014. The survey filled an initial data gap, but from design to delivery, it was one year before the results were available.Filling the data gapsThe challenge of data relevance in urban planning is not unique to Jakarta, and has spurred many attempts to use other types of data to produce similar statistics. The most promising use geolocated information such as GPS devices, sensors, social media and mobile phone data.In Indonesia, social media is recognised as a promising data source to understand macro patterns of behaviour. This is especially true of Jakarta, which has been named the Twitter Capital of the World due to the ten million tweets posted there every day.Pulse Lab Jakarta used this opportunity to test whether the locational information from social media on mobile devices can reveal commuting patterns in the Greater Jakarta area. First we produced origin-destination statistics for the ten cities in Greater Jakarta from the GPS-stamped tweets in the database by identifying a subset of people who commute between these areas. Secondly, we calibrated the initial result based on the population distribution and Twitter user distribution. Finally we verified the result with the official commuting statistics produced by the Indonesian Bureau of Statistics.Origin-destination analysisWe collected all GPS-stamped tweets posted in Greater Jakarta from a data firehose and subsetted tweets posted between 1st January 2014 and 30th May 2014, considering that the official commuting survey was conducted during the first quarter of 2014.Per user, we inferred two locations: origin and destination, both at sub-district level. Origin location was inferred as the most tweeted sub-district location between 9pm and 7am. Destination location was determined as the most tweeted sub-district location during weekdays, excluding the origin location.Using this approach, among the 1,456,927 unique users who posted GPS-located tweets in Greater Jakarta during the five months from January 2014, we found the origin and destination information for 305,761 users at the sub-district level (i.e. we were not zooming in any further). This represents about 2.8 per cent of the whole population, and 14 per cent of the commuting population in Greater Jakarta.Due to the unequal penetration rates of Twitter, we mapped the origin-destination information at sub-district level to city level, and calibrated the information based on the population data from the ten cities. After calibration, the cross correlation score between the two forms of statistics, official statistics and the statistics from our approach, improved from 0.92 to 0.97.Chord diagram: official commuter flows (left) and commuting statistics inferred from Twitter (right)Results in fullThe chord diagram shows that Twitter is a promising source of data for inferring commuting statistics in Greater Jakarta.(Left to right) Table A: Official statistics from the commuting survey in 2014 on the per cent of commuters from the ten cities in Greater Jakarta to the five administrative cities in Jakarta. Table B: Commuting statistics inferred from Twitter on the per cent of commuters from the ten cities in Greater Jakarta to the five administrative cities in Jakarta. Table C: Rank comparison with the official statistics.In Table C we see the rank difference between Table A and Table B. For instance, the value for SJ ⇒ CJ is calculated as ‘0’ because the two statistics are the same. Table C suggests that our approach produces broadly reliable predictions.We hope to improve the method with better calibration using other demographic variables, as well as expand our research by analysing commuting data from Transjakarta.This research was originally presented at NetMob 2017 and more recently at the Asia-Pacific Economic Statistics Week. Our partner in this research, the Institute of Statistics, part of Statistics Indonesia, is planning to use this method to enhance commuting statistics produced by the Government henceforth.Measuring the many aspects of development is often fraught with challenges. The Philippine Statistics Authority which collects data on different sectors in the Philippines has been advancing new methods to measure progress, particularly against the Sustainable Development Goals.Our data scientist was recently in Manila attending the 2017 International Conference on Sustainable Development Goals Statistics, hosted by the Philippine Statistics Authority and the United Nations Statistics Division. For his presentation, he put together a neat set of slides that captures some of Global Pulse’s new statistical methods for tracking progress towards the SDGs.Ahead of the 4th UN Conference on Big Data which will take place in Colombia next month, we thought we should share the slides and unpack some of the projects.Early detection of food price anomalies is critical for timely action by governments. Partnering with Bappenas (the Indonesian Ministry of Development Planning) and the World Food Programme, Pulse Lab Jakarta developed a statistical model to extract prices for four food commodities (beef, chicken, onion and chilli) in Indonesia from public discussions on Twitter.When the modeled prices were compared with the official food prices from the Indonesian Government, released later, the figures were closely correlated. These findings demonstrated that near real-time social media signals can function as a proxy for daily food price statistics, and an early warning mechanism for price fluctuations. This approach is particularly useful to citizens and other stakeholders alike given that the official figures tend to be released to the public, and shared across government with some time lag.Building on past studies which show that data from mobile phones (in particular from call details records and airtime credit purchases) can be used to understand socio-economic conditions, we conducted research into the potential of using mobile phone data to produce a set of proxies for education and household characteristics.Using anonymised mobile data from the Pacific island of Vanuatu, proxies for four types of statistical indicators were extracted from mobile phone data that was made available by a local carrier. These indicators included education, household assets, household expenditure, and household income. The findings confirmed a relatively strong correlation between indicators from the mobile data and data from the official statistics provided by the National Statistics Office in Vanuatu.Gender inequality is manifested in many aspects of life. We partnered with the UN Capital Development Fund (UNCDF)’s SHIFT Programme to analyse anonymised financial records from four financial service providers in Cambodia in order to investigate the factors affecting savings and loans mobilisation, with a focus on gender disaggregation.Our data analysis suggests that despite the fact that men and women have equal access to credit and savings services in the region, the actual usage patterns in terms of the loans and savings amounts mobilised are much lower for most women. The data also enables more powerful insights, not just breaking down data simply gender, but doing further gender disaggregated data analysis by age categories, marital status and geographies (rural, urban, and between provinces).Gaining an up-to-date snapshot of development progress within countries is useful for tracking the effectiveness of national policies. Pulse Lab Jakarta teamed up with Carlos III University of Madrid and UNICEF to explore the potential of utilising social media to produce a proxy indicator of the human development index. For this research, we analysed tweets coming out of the islands of Java and Sumatra in Indonesia, and employed similar methods used for inferring unemployment rates in Spain.The results from this research revealed that the predicted human development index fitted closely with the actual human development index, thus pointing to the precision of the model used. This encouraged us to expand the approach to other countries including Brazil and Mexico, both of which showed relatively consistent results.Jakarta is renowned for its heavy traffic which makes daily commutes a lengthy task, and tracking the commutes of Greater Jakarta’s 30 million residents is an even more mammoth task. To tackle this data problem, we decided to analyse GPS-stamped tweets.Along with Sekolah Tinggi Ilmu Statistik (STIS), we initiated a project to test whether location information from social media on mobile devices could reveal commuting patterns. The project calibrated the initial result based on the population distribution and Twitter user distribution. Next, we verified the results with the official commuting statistics produced by the Indonesian Bureau of Statistics. The results of the research confirmed that geo-located tweets have the potential to fill existing information gaps in the official commuting statistics.Commuting statistics — 10 cities in Greater Jakarta to 5 cities in JakartaOur team has been analysing satellite imagery to map locations with climate and rainfall anomalies and to provide early warning alerts to policymakers. Our VAMPIRE (Vulnerability Analysis Monitoring Platform for Impact of Regional Events) platform provides map-based visualisations and features three main layers: a baseline data layer (population data, socio-economic and food security surveys), a climate layer (rainfall anomaly, standardised precipitation index and vegetation health index) and an impact layer (economic vulnerability and exposure to drought).The benefit is to provide real-time awareness of the evolving nature of slow onset climate phenomena, which can then be used to better channel assistance to vulnerable populations. The working prototype is available here.The examples above represent a snapshot of our overall work related to the SDGs. To better address the challenges that we face today as a global community, we recognise that everyone needs to do their part. For this reason, we are keen on fostering partnerships with governments, private sector and civil society entities on a range of topics linked to the Global Goals. Furthermore, as new and powerful technologies continue to emerge with the potential to offer new insights, our mission is to continue leveraging these innovative tools in conjunction with traditional data in order to inform action to achieve each of the SDGs sub-targets by 2030.We had the distinct pleasure of working with the Urban Poor Consortium in 2015, under our Data Innovation Mini Grants. Based on popular demand, the Urban Poor Consortium has kindly shared its approach to participatory urban vulnerability mapping in the form of a toolkit. It is a step-by-step guide to participatory data collection, data visualisation and decision making in urban communities. Enjoy!Last week we attended a genuine, honest-to-goodness-we-want-your-opinion, public consultation for the new draft presidential decree for Satu Data (One Data) Indonesia. Over 100 representatives from civil society, the private sector, and government agencies gathered at the recently launched Jakarta Creative Hub, eager to provide feedback to The Executive Office of the President, BAPPENAS, and Open Government Indonesia. Below we highlight the key features of the decree, the main concerns raised at the consultation, and also the opportunities the decree presents.The aim: better data governance for better policiesThe beauty of this draft decree is that it hones in on a crucial — but oft neglected — aspect of ensuring the availability of high-quality data for decision-making: the governance structures that make it easier to assure quality, integrate, share and use datasets across government agencies. Some of the technical features include: mandating that each and every data set produced by government agencies should comply with an official standard for data production; requiring that the data produced come attached with metadata explaining the rationale and methodology behind the data; and requiring commons standards of interoperability on all data produced by government agencies.In the draft decree, the strategies for Satu Data will be implemented by a range of cross-agency actors through a Steering Committee, a national level implementation team, and implementation teams at subnational level. This proposed governance structure clearly shows an attempt to overcome the frequently expressed pain points of overlapping datasets, lack of data quality, and difficulty in data sharing. Two particular roles stand out in this aspect. The first is Pembina Data (Data Mentor), which are national agencies authorized to build the capacity of other government agencies to implement Satu Data and, most importantly, to resolve any data disputes between agencies. The second is Wali Data (Data Custodians), a unit responsible for collecting, managing, assuring quality and disseminating data produced by their agency. The decree does not stipulate which particular unit in an agency shall act as Wali Data, but it will most likely be the role of each agency’s Data and Information Centre (Pusdatin). What the decree does stipulate is that the Wali Data will be the only unit in that agency that is authorised to release data publicly.In its heart of hearts, this decree represents a foundational push towards making data produced by government freely available for public use. Article 20 of the draft decree, for instance, takes a clear “open by default” stance: it requires that the Wali Data open all data and metadata produced by the agency on one shared government data portal, except in cases where the release of that data is restricted by another regulation. Also of interest is Article 21, which deftly eliminates the need for cost and superfluous paperwork when sharing data across agencies (which, we quietly hope, will translate into similarly unburdensome arrangements for public use of the data).There is very little argument against the philosophy of Satu Data. Taking sex disaggregated data as an example, deciding between ‘male-female’ and ‘man-woman’ as the official standard for data classification will go a long way in enabling better gender analysis. It also makes sense for the government to have only one official data in cases of contradicting data sets even when both claim to use the same methodology. However, there were many concerns around implementation challenges and unintended consequences raised during the public consultation.Will Satu Data deter government agencies from using data produced by other sources?The push for unified standards may unintentionally become a disincentive for government agencies to accept and use data produced by research institutions or service units for decision-making. This is a major area of concern, first because there is usually a significant time lapse between collection of official government data and when it can be used; and secondly because tapping into the wealth of data produced by other parties can provide new insights for a policy issue.The Wali Data function, while essential for coordinating quality assurance and sharing of data, can also potentially become a barrier for data collection by non-government entities if they are mandated to become a gatekeeper for all research activity in the area. Although the decree does not stipulate any restrictions against the use of data produced by non-government entities for government decision-making, it might be worth clarifying this stance in articles pertaining to the functions of Wali Data to avoid ambiguous interpretation.How can civil society be involved in Satu Data?The open by default and one data portal clauses in the decree will undoubtedly be a game changer for better implementation of the government’s open data policy; however, the decree has yet to identify a clear mechanism for civil society involvement in governing Satu Data. The attendees repeatedly asked whether Satu Data enables the public to actively contribute to data production, share their data with the Government, or provide feedback to the data quality or governance mechanism. One possibility is using existing public consultation fora of data mentors or custodians as a platform for providing feedback to the Satu Data initiative. Statistics Indonesia (Badan Pusat Statistik), for instance, already has a public consultation arm called Forum Masyarakat Statistik, an equivalent for which could be explored for different types of data. Another possibility is to include public representatives in the Steering Committee or Implementation Team, following the existing model used by Open Government Indonesia.How can the decree nudge government agencies to implement Satu Data?Implementing Satu Data properly means many government agencies will need to change their existing behaviors, which is challenging in any setting. Moreover, the decree is currently fuzzy in laying down incentives for implementation. Many concerns were raised over the potential overlap between the Wali Data function and existing PPID (Pusat Informasi dan Dokumentasi / Center for Information and Documentation) and PeDASI (Pejabat Pengolah Data dan Informasi / Data and Information Management Official) functions. Clarifying the difference between these functions early on will help minimize confusion and resistance that can lead to non-action.Some of the private sector representatives raised the idea of using existing technology for faster, easier implementation of data interoperability. This includes technological solutions for converting various forms of existing datasets into machine readable formats, as well as more efficient ways of integrating data across agencies and automating preliminary data analysis. As we’ve expressed in other posts, our sense is that technology is only one aspect of a larger system of knowledge production. The efficacy of such technological solutions lies in whether they are able to empower implementing agencies and public services to harness the power of their own data to make better decisions. In order to do that, technological solutions would need to be combined with other approaches that support local sensemaking of data. It would be quite interesting, however, to test this concept of data empowerment in several districts to see what learnings can be gained for the national roll-out of Satu Data.Other cool things we’re really liking…Missed the public consultation session? Don’t worry, the amazing people at Open Government Indonesia made the materials publicly available. This presentation provides a high-level view of some of the policy imperatives around Satu Data, and this one details the main features of the draft decree, as well as some context around the pain points that the decree attempts to address, while this is where you can read the draft decree itself.If you have any inputs for the Satu Data decree, you are not too late. Send your feedback to contact@opengovindonesia.org before 31 May 2017!The scene is all too familiar: a room of 45 people, discussions are plentiful, and spirits high with the hopeful air of co-creation, and ultimately, innovation. It is one of the few times that players from the public sector can not only rub shoulders, but also work together with the likes of CSOs, private sector enterprises, and your run-of-the-mill citizen. The process lasts for two days, maybe three, it closes with applause and elation, and almost immediately, the room empties after a round of handshakes.The thing about co-design workshops is that they don’t do what you think they do.Afterwards, in an ideal world, participants from the public sector go back into a different space to deliberate, refine, and implement.Yet, this post-workshop scenario is rarely amplified. As the ‘public participation’ buzzword intensifies, so does the increasing skepticism in the overall process. Much of the skepticism is driven by the expectation that co-design workshops like those described above are the ultimate key to open governance. But the thing about co-design workshops is that they don’t do what you think they do.The many faces of a co-design workshopWorkshops and buzzwordsThe rise in public participation the world over enables governments to design services and policies not only with experts, but also with the users they are designing for. Approaches include evidence-based policymaking and co-design workshops: a process that gathers together those with the needs, those with the skills to build, and those with the ability to implement. These categories are not mutually exclusive.Co-design workshops with the public sector are excellent in many ways, most notably because they allow unlikely agents to undergo the human-centred design process, an approach we use as a basis of our service design. Amongst others, participants in the workshop learn, create prototypes and undergo the iterative development through testing — all by developing empathy with the users they are designing for. Developing empathy as a response is facilitated by both interaction with other participants, as well as by undergoing rapid fieldwork within the limited time given during the workshop.Good ideas translate into action only when bureaucracy + skills + willingness are combined.For our project with UNDP on improving the public transportation system in Makassar, our user research initiative was followed-up by a co-design workshop involving stakeholders from the government, interest groups, startups and designers from the private sector, as well as transportation and traffic experts. What resulted was the creation of six low-fidelity prototypes that represent the needs of the users, and most importantly, a platform for discussion with a variety of stakeholders. Assumptions are built and broken down precisely through the interaction of different perspectives, which enabled government officials to take into account the needs of everyday public transport users, drivers, as well as urban planning experts.It then becomes a tad unfair to entirely discredit the workshop process, as it does hold the key to building empathy and even to producing good ideas. Yet, good ideas don’t necessarily translate into action.Scenes at the Public Transportation workshop held in MakassarBureaucracy + skills + willingnessFew things get as much of a bad rap as bureaucracy does. However, many often discount the difficulty in overcoming the remaining hindrances that often arise when attempting to innovate. Good ideas translate into action only when bureaucracy + skills + willingness are combined.When the public sector has agreed to take on the task of undertaking the challenge, the issue of willingness has been tackled. With great willingness also comes interventions to curb the complicated process of bureaucracy, and direct it to enable a more successful implementation of services. However, innovative services often require skills that might not be possessed by the public sector. It is not often that those with the ability to implement are also those with the skills to build — and it is one of the base reasons why we so strongly believe in multi-stakeholder approaches.Yet, as we have learned, when participation ends at the planning stage, there is little support to facilitate the creation and application of the new services. To achieve this, it becomes our responsibility to extend citizen collaboration well beyond planning, and it all started with the winning prototype from the workshop.The winning teamThe idea was Passikola, a system that aims to repurpose existing pete-pete vehicles — the most commonly used public transportation in Makassar — into a school carpool vehicle. The solution addresses the needs and behaviours of two stakeholders. First, pete-pete drivers have been known to struggle in receiving their share of pay as there are less and less people using the pete-pete to commute, often citing the reckless behaviour of the drivers. On the other hand, parents need a reliable mode of transportation for their children to get to and from school. Unfortunately, many of their houses are not within pete-pete routes and as a result, parents need to take their children to school by themselves, often on motorbikes, thereby creating traffic congestion around schools.What emerged was a solution that not only repurposes the usage and routes of existing pete-pete, but one that also aims to nudge behavioural change of users and operators to abide by traffic laws and reduce congestion. Inspiration was also gathered from another idea from the workshop — the digitizing of pete-pete-related information to improve the user experience, into a system called e-Nassami. This includes the incorporation of a GPS-based tracking system as well as an application to provide detailed information on arrival and departure times of the Passikola.The user at the center of the service designBeyond the workshopWe stepped out of the confines of the workshop room and furthered our partnership with UNDP, BaKTI, and the department of transportation of Makassar and engaged them to go out and test the prototypes in an iterative manner, which includes the refinement and development of the selected idea.We invited workshop participants on a voluntary basis to continue developing the public transportation activity for their city, and received interest from around 30% of the workshop participants, including members of the public transportation interest group (ORGANDA) and public officials. The incubation process was overseen by the Mayor of Makassar himself and revolved around the winning prototype from the workshop.Involvement of those in the private sector essentially enabled us to undertake a development project at startup speed.What we built was not only a platform for prototype refinement, but what is essentially a pop-up innovation lab to realize the objective of building a better public transportation system for Makassar.Pulse Lab Jakarta has recently assessed some of its projects, including those supported under its Data Innovation Mini Grants. This process has yielded important lessons and interesting results. It has also provided insights at the macro level into the challenges of implementing innovations in the development sector to the point of sustainable impact and scale.Summarizing these insights and building on similar stage-based analyses from other disciplines, here are six distinct stages that illustrate specific challenges to the successful implementation of innovation for development.1. Ideation. Pulse Lab Jakarta’s partners prove that innovative ideas can start with one person and come from anywhere. Innovation can be self-driven or promoted, for example through financial incentive or open-minded management. But if no-one hears about an idea, then does it make a sound? Save for the self-funded few, the originator must sufficiently champion the idea such that it can progress to the next stage. The key here is in empowerment to think freely and communicate.2. Selection. With a free market in ideas, there is a need to separate the wheat from the chaff. In the development context this often occurs through team feedback and internal design meetings, and more broadly through proposal review for grant awards or government funding as well as during competitive events such as app challenges and hackathons. The challenge is in casting the net for ideas wide enough to avoid a bubble which recycles the same actors and approaches.In the process of culling, juries and reviewers will consider elements such as design, value, sustainability and capacity — and in so doing may also skew assessment towards their own priorities. Of no less importance — and yet frequently less practiced — this should also entail rigorous “ground-truthing”, or ensuring that ideas address actual and observed problems. This could include analysis of the relevant political economy in order to assess the prospects and likely routes for traction in implementation.3. Piloting. By definition, innovative ideas are untested. And so for the Grade A ideas screened in the previous stage, prototypes need to be built and designs piloted. This is the critical stage of experimentation as well as, ideally, learning and refinement through iteration. Pulse Lab Jakarta’s experience is that piloting tends to focus on building and testing of technology at the expense of the essential human-centric element of demonstrating impact to intended beneficiaries.4. Persuasion. This is the complicated cross-section where supply solicits demand. Armed with a successful prototype and with ambition to implement, innovators require powers of persuasion and a targeted advocacy strategy to achieve buy-in (both literal and figurative) from key stakeholders. This stage may entail encouraging donors to more actively and strategically invest. Demand among policy makers may be stoked by strong data and compelling stories of impact but also by political imperative and incentive.5. Uptake & Implementation. This stage is easy to promise — as reflected in many proposals received by Pulse Lab Jakarta — and yet difficult to achieve. Often it involves impacting policy. Evidence-to-policy analysts define policy uptake on several levels, from influencing debate to reforming legislation. To reach this stage suggests the successful navigation of numerous challenges relating to financing, the regulatory environment, changing policy priorities, institutional culture and egos, as well as individual and institutional capacity. And implementation is not a line to cross, but requires strategies in support of sustainability.6. Scale. Most development programs cite lofty goals in which scale is inherent — such as improved democratic governance and poverty reduction. Most good innovations tout scalability by the second stage of this process. But we’re not often accountable for this, since such goals are typically “beyond the life or scope of the project.” Scale requires consistent championing beyond the timeframe of most development projects and programs.In Indonesia, there is a strength in the first three stages. There is no shortage of innovative ideas. Positive engagement by the government, international donors, technology companies and others has spurred efforts to promote and screen the best of these. Pilots and prototypes abound.The challenge in innovating for development has been in getting through and beyond stage 4 where impact is felt. Very few initiatives sustain at stage 5. Stage 6 remains the stuff of legend (and case studies).Why is this so? Broadly stated, because each successive stage entails greater funding, time, risk (financial, reputational, and political), complexity of both implementation and stakeholder engagement and the capacity to manage all of the above. Failure to successfully accommodate any one of these can result in attrition.Short-term project cycles, routine staff turnover, and even changing government priorities and policies pose significant challenges to planning across all six of these stages. As such, the imperative to collaborate becomes stronger at each stage — but this grates against our instincts and mandates to work in silos. Donors often encourage implementers to work within specific project parameters. Individual organisations may have limited mandates or be reluctant to collaborate with each other since they often compete in other circumstances for awards.And then there is the digital-development divide. The skill sets that drive progress through stages 1–3 can differ from those which most effectively drive progress in stages 4–6. Few development professionals understand app development or social media analytics; conversely, data scientists do not always transition well into policy advocates. Bridging this will require more diverse recruitment, improved technical capacity, and more effective collaboration.The bottom line is that in innovating for development, experience suggests it is advisable to set realistic goals in manageable components — acknowledging the complex stages and project-specific characteristics in this process, and then planning around the challenges within each.Hot on the heels of the Urban Vulnerability Mapping Toolkit and connected to our ongoing work in Bandung and Makassar, we teamed up with Participate in Design to compile approaches to urban data collection and design from around the world. Below we share a few thoughts and guide itself.They’re Our Communities, Let’s Design ThemThe challenges of urbanisation are often attributed to government systems. However, at the center of urban commerce, lifestyle and infrastructures are everyday citizens. Creating opportunities for urban communities to lead the problem-solving process is not just theoretical; it has been field-tested in different cities across the globe, including here in Jakarta.For some Jakartans, it is bothersome navigating the busy streets of the city, while for others the fast-paced bustle is the definition of a thriving city. From this, one can already deduce the complexities of various views and needs of urban dwellers, yet it is from these diverse perspectives that communities learn to identify and work together on common goals.With more than fifty percent of the world’s population living in urban areas, designing solutions with communities, and enabling citizens to be involved in urban planning are good participatory ideals: but how exactly does a city go about it?This guide to participatory approaches around the globe was developed to shape our work and answer that question. It provides insights into how other cities have done, from initiating participatory urban data collection to realising participatory urban design.The Urban Vulnerability Mapping sample, which you will find in the guide, highlights how citizens’ involvement in North Jakarta has improved community-level data and informed development priorities. The approach relied on the use of simple, non-obscured technological tools, a step-by-step strategy, and — the leadership of citizens from that community.The 24 samples contained in the guide are not instructional blueprints nonetheless, given their unique political, social, economic and other contexts. Still, you will notice that they are useful for replicating active citizen and public participation in imagining urban change.Urbanisation has its ills, but with the number of urban dwellers globally expected to rise to 6.5 billion, each citizen has an active role to play in making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable.Fixing urban problems shouldn’t just rest with the government. They’re our communities, and we should shape them…Public transportation services are not always gender sensitive and safety concerns related to women’s mobility in metropolitan areas are at times overlooked. The lack of a safe and inclusive public transportation system influences many decisions that women make, from where to go to work, how far from home to travel to school, to where to shop for basic household items.Pulse Lab Jakarta has teamed up with UN Women to gather insights on women’s mobility and travel choices in urban areas in order to design practical interventions that can improve the safety of women. What does safety mean for women when using public transportation at night? What is the travel experience like from the time they leave their house, go through transit and arrive at their final destination?Our FocusA recent scoping study in Jakarta conducted by UN Women found that women are more vulnerable when travelling after dusk, especially in less crowded areas. Thus our research was designed with a view to complementing findings from this safety audit focusing on women’s travel movements during evening hours.Whereas the safety audit report looks more into the forms, risk factors, impact, and efforts to prevent or respond to sexual harassment and sexual violence experienced by women and girls in Jakarta, one of the broader objectives of our research is to understand what “being safe” means for women when travelling at night, including learning about what emotions and thinking influence their travel decisions.We approach this research with the understanding that a woman’s mobility, for instance from home to her place of work, should not be fragmented into dilemmas of safe and unsafe segments — every part of the journey should be safe. We believe that women have the right to safely experience the cities they live in and access the resources it has to offer to achieve their full potential as citizens. Therefore, we will endeavour to learn more about every aspect of women’s travelling experience from the first mile, which is usually near to home; to the last mile; and every stop in between.In addition, we will investigate the potential of establishing a few integrated transit areas and explore how these transit areas might affect women’s safety during travel. Our fieldwork will cover three major cities in Indonesia: Semarang, Surabaya and Medan.Our ApproachHuman-centred design (HCD) relies on empathising with respondents to understand their behaviours and needs and this approach aligns well with our research objectives. Through this method, we hope to gain a deeper understanding about women’s individual experience rather than arriving at basic generalisations. And to help us achieve this outcome, our field researchers will use diary studies, contextual interviews/shadowing, and in-depth interviews.Given the unique characteristics of HCD, all three of these research tools are expected to complement each other. But what’s keeping us on our toes as we go further into the field research is the diary study! Through these diaries, we intend to track the respondents’ travel activities in the form of a daily log. Each diary will include information about the respondents’ experience, emotions, desires, needs, and discomfort when travelling from one point to the next at night.Furthermore, using a diary study can help us to discover what the respondents experience throughout the day since it is a self-reporting tool that reduces observers or interviewers’ influence on respondent’s’ behaviour or opinion. After participants make their diary entries, we will use these notes to trigger further discussion.a respondent recording her travel activities in the diary we’ve preparedThe next step of the journeyFieldwork for this scoping study is ongoing and we expect to have some results at the end of the year. The results are intended to be used in several ways, but here are a few things we already have planned:Co-design workshop: insights collected from the field will be repurposed as stimuli for a co-design workshop at the end of the research phase, where our partners and stakeholders will be invited to collaboratively design intervention prototypes.Pulse Stories: insights gathered throughout the research will be collated into a report that will be publicly available on pulselabjakarta.orgIn general, the findings from this scoping study should help citizens, city planners, transportation authorities, and other government officials answer the question: How should a safe public transportation system that is sensitive to the needs of women be designed?We’re excited to be partnering with UN Women on this study, not only because of the opportunity we have to apply our HCD approach, but also the opportunities that are ahead for improving public transportation safety for women and creating safer and more inclusive cities for everyone.Indonesia today boasts one of the fastest growing economies worldwide — the largest in Southeast Asia — and an ambitious anti-poverty strategy designed to ensure that the country’s rapid growth is socially inclusive. The Government of Indonesia (GOI), keeping pace with the data revolution that is transforming commerce and society, is proactively working to unlock this potential to reshape and boost its economic development efforts.Sound macroeconomic management is a pillar of economic stability for individuals, households, firms, and communities worldwide. With support from The Rockefeller Foundation, FHI 360 is partnering with innovative organizations worldwide to identify the most important recent innovations that support key dimensions of economic stability in the service of building more inclusive economies and to tell their stories to the global development audience. One such partner is Pulse Lab Jakarta (PLJ), a unique joint initiative of the United Nations and the GOI that is working to support innovation in the use of big data and human centered design for inclusive development in Indonesia and regionally, with support from the Government of Australia (DFAT).Recognizing that conventional datasets are no longer adequate to maximize government responsiveness, the GOI efforts are aimed at paving the way for it to become a more proactive and anticipatory government, stimulated by more data-driven economic development. Indonesia’s Ministry of National Development Planning (BAPPENAS) in particular has seized the opportunity to use near real-time data to monitor economic development and keep the country’s inclusive growth on track. BAPPENAS, with development planning at the core of its mandate, was among the first institutions within the government to recognize that conventional datasets are no longer sufficient to inform rapid policy response to economic volatility. Pulse Lab Jakarta (PLJ) was established as a data innovation lab in part to test the feasibility of using digital data signals to inform the country’s economic strategy and policy decisions, with a view to providing early warnings of economic shocks that could derail inclusive development.Since the Lab’s inception in 2013, directorates from BAPPENAS have been working alongside PLJ’s research team to experiment with ways to harness new data from social media, e-commerce, shipping, and other emerging sources, and to overlay these with conventional economic data to create a more complete picture of the country’s inclusive growth performance. In a series of collaborative projects, PLJ has provided the data processing and analytical capabilities, while domain experts within BAPPENAS designed and completed substantive analysis related to Indonesia’s development goals. This approach has enabled improved knowledge exchange and information flow, building on complementary skill sets and straightforward discussions on the feasibility of each project. Some of the recent projects have included:Monitoring food price dynamics using Twitter data, especially for priority commodities such as rice and beef, to provide early warning of price spikes that can destabilize consumption among poorer Indonesians.Using e-commerce data as indicators for domestic economy.Monitoring shipping arrivals and departures and e-commerce data as proxies for the conditions of the domestic economy and as an early-warning system for changes in trade patterns that impact Indonesian SMEs.Better understanding the relationship between inflation rates and public sentiment of the increase in prices of certain commodities using social media data.Analyzing global perceptions of the “Wonderful Indonesia” tourism brand and Indonesia’s flagship destinations based on information publicly shared on social networking platforms.As customary in experimenting with new approaches, these projects are not designed to be finished products, but rather to act as an opener for further iterations. For instance, the project using e-commerce data was focused on investigating housing price data across provinces to see whether any insights could be gleaned from the comparison. While the team managed to process the data and show the price dynamics, the actual analysis to correlate this to events, shocks or stresses, or other economic indicators was not performed immediately.These experimental approaches are a starting point for the incorporation of innovative big data solutions into policy. Initial analysis of e-commerce data to understand housing prices sparked new ideas for utilizing the same data to prevent the Government’s SDG1-aligned poverty reduction initiatives from being derailed by shocks. Among a batch of 30 new collaborative project proposals from BAPPENAS for 2018, several include the use of e-commerce data to answer various macroeconomics research questions such as better mapping inter-regional trade intensity and regional trading patterns. Innovations from the GOI and PLJ and more than fifty other organizations will be featured in an Atlas of Innovation for Economic Stability in spring, 2018.This feature is being published simultaneously at FHI 360’s Crowd 360 Stability Innovation Hub and on Pulse Lab Jakarta’s Medium page.FHI 360 is a nonprofit human development organization dedicated to improving lives in lasting ways by advancing integrated, locally driven solutions. Its staff includes experts in health, education, nutrition, environment, economic development, civil society, gender, youth, research, technology, communication and social marketing. FHI 360 serves more than 60 countries and all U.S. states and territories. www.fhi360.org.Pulse Lab Jakarta is a joint data initiative of the Government of Indonesia and the United Nations that is working to close information gaps in the development and humanitarian sectors through the adoption of big data, real-time analytics and artificial intelligence. The Lab wants digital data sources and artificial intelligence to be harnessed responsibly as a public good. As part of the Global Pulse network, its mission is to accelerate the discovery and adoption of data innovation for sustainable development and humanitarian action. www.unglobalpulse.org/jakarta.Setting national goals and implementing a set of strategies to achieve them have been central to how modern governments operate. From maintaining economic stability to promoting social welfare, these goals are often manifold and require a mechanism for monitoring and evaluation. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that were jointly adopted in 2015 by countries worldwide, much in the same way need a robust framework, including tools to monitor their progress and inform policy makers throughout the 15-year timeline.The Government of Indonesia, recognising the ambitious scope of the 17 goals and 169 targets, has sought to explore the benefits of a data visualisation asset — an SDGs monitoring dashboard. This interactive tool was designed by Pulse Lab Jakarta in consultation with the Ministry of National Development Planning (Bappenas) with the intention to track progress towards the SDGs across the country’s diverse archipelago. Here we share a few screenshots of the dashboard, as well as some of its useful features.With more than 17,000 islands and 542 districts/cities in Indonesia, the Government has a tall order when it comes to developing national governance for the SDGs. Thus, an SDGs Secretariat was established within Bappenas to support the implementation and monitoring of all the goals. To perform these tasks effectively, however, means having timely and reliable information from each district/city government in order to design a localised roadmap and manage specific targets.One of the Government’s first steps was to develop a system to enhance data governance itself within the public sector via the Satu Data Initiative. This initiative was expected to dovetail with the Government’s efforts to monitor the SDGs, especially pertaining to the availability of government data.As with many compound government datasets though, the information would still be unstructured, and therefore still needing to be processed and further translated to highlight relevant linkages between the SDGs and the country’s Rencana Pembangunan Jangka Menengah Daerah 2015–2019 (RPJMD — Medium Term Development Plan). The Government’s answer was an analysis and data visualisation tool.Together with Bappenas’ Data and Information Centre (Pusdatin) and the SDGs Secretariat, our team at the Lab set out to analyse SDGs-related data using an interactive map dashboard. This dashboard displays information related to the 17 sustainable development goals throughout 34 provinces in the country, based on 241 indicators.Once a user selects one of the 17 sustainable development goals to explore on the dashboard, she or he will have the option to choose an indicator related to the specific SDG from the list available. From here, relevant statistical information and progress updates will be depicted for the 34 provinces, in the form of a line chart, bar chart and a colour-coded country map.So, should a user select SDG#4 — Quality Education for instance and choose High School Gross Enrollment Rate (Angka Partisipasi Kasar — SMA) as the indicator to explore, the dashboard will show which of the 34 provinces are either above or below the national average. In this example, as seen in the screenshot below, Maluku’s average of 92.12 per cent is above the national average of 83.55 per cent (indicated by the vertical red line), again specifically for the High School Gross Enrollment Rate indicator. Additionally, all the provinces are visualised on a country map with different colours to illustrate which ones are near or far from the national average.For many street food vendors, small shop owners and thousands of entrepreneurs like them across Indonesia, access to financial services that can help them to meet their needs often lies outside their reach. With the uptick in the number of sophisticated financial technologies, there are emerging opportunities that can aid the delivery of faster and more efficient services in developing countries. To promote resilience and growth within Indonesia’s unbanked micro business sector, Pulse Lab Jakarta is collaborating with the Government of Australia on a research project to understand the experiences of early fintech adopters among those enterprises.Micro and small-to-medium enterprises (MSME) in Indonesia employ more than 107 million people, contributing to more than half of the county’s GDP. In 2016, the Government launched a National Strategy for Financial Inclusion which aims to provide regulatory support for banking institutions as they work to guarantee more Indonesians’ access to financial services. Following this, the Financial Services Authority (OJK) announced that more progressive financial technology regulations — designed to promote financial inclusion — were also underway.More than just a buzzword, financial inclusion focuses on ensuring that individuals, regardless of income levels, have access to appropriate financial services. The broader goal is to help improve welfare, by removing barriers to safe and efficient means of conducting financial transactions. For micro enterprises in particular, financial inclusion can contribute to the growth of their businesses with improved access to convenient financial services and products.With the support of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT), Australia and in collaboration with the Indonesia Fintech Association (AFTECH), Pulse Lab Jakarta’s research project — called ‘Banking on Fintech: Financial Inclusion for Micro Enterprises in Indonesia’ — aims to contribute to the Government of Indonesia’s financial inclusion goals by uncovering behavioural and data analysis insights on micro enterprises as potential users of financial technology.A Micro Enterprise FocusRoughly 99 per cent of all businesses in Indonesia are micro enterprises, according to the Ministry of Cooperatives and SMEs. The Government defines micro enterprises as ‘productive businesses owned by an individual and/or group of individuals that have net assets worth a maximum of Rp.50 million (not inclusive of land and buildings where the business is located) or an annual sales revenue that do not exceed Rp. 300 million’.To narrow our focus, we are initially researching micro enterprises from the food and beverages as well as retail sectors, since enterprises in these sectors have the highest interaction frequency when it comes to supplier-customer exchanges. Our emphasis on behavioural insights stems from the realisation that: while financial inclusion efforts should be pioneered by higher-level policymaking, it must also be supported with a clear understanding of the realities of the target users.Beyond understanding the users’ realities, we expect to translate our insights into opportunities that can act as incentives for the financial service industry, in addition to informing the improvement and creation of effective financial services for the unbanked population.Doing Our HomeworkPrior to commencing our user research, we reviewed a series of publications and related work to gather informed insights relating to the unbanked population in Indonesia. We uncovered three main findings, which we used to inform our baseline knowledge on the issue.First, most people who are unbanked are of the opinion that living in a cash-based ecosystem does not pose a significant enough problem that warrants a change in habits. Therefore, services might have to be designed to cater to their current cash-based habits, instead of completely excluding their existing habits and pushing for a complete behavioural change.Secondly, most people who are ‘financially excluded’ are inclined to use informal financial mechanisms such as cooperatives or lending groups. This social dimension promotes trustworthiness and acts as a sort of active reminder that encourages users to save.Finally, users interact with financial services according to individual habits and needs at different points in their lives. Services should thus be able to cater to the needs of different business-owners and to the medium- and long-term needs of their businesses.The Early AdoptersRecognising that there is extensive research investigating some of the behavioural barriers to getting the unbanked population aboard, we have taken note of a number of key financial service providers in Indonesia that have indeed succeeded at converting the unbanked to banked. Our main question therefore is: Why, despite the same obstacles and behavioural barriers, have some micro enterprises made the leap and began to use these services?Today, many financial institutions are adopting initiatives to advance financial inclusion for individuals who are unbanked, notably through digital financial services. As part of our research project, we will engage with a number of these pioneering services to identify the gap between early adopters of financial technology and those that are unbanked. We aspire to uncover learnings from these early adopters’ stories and translate them into opportunities for the rest of the unbanked population.We are currently developing partnerships with those who have committed to supporting the financial inclusion agenda and aim to incorporate our findings to create prototypes by mid-2018. We will keep you posted as we progress — stay tuned!It was a full house at the Lab this week as we welcomed a new batch of participants for our final Research Dive of the year, this time diving into alternative datasets to answer policy and development questions on how to accelerate financial inclusion across Indonesia. The usual three-day activities that make our Research Dives what they are — a set of intensive collaborative research sprints — remained intact, yet ideas about new data sources and approaches to consider coupled with the participants’ enthusiasm gave this Research Dive a certain dynamism. Coming full circle on the last day for final presentations, four teams took to the floor to share their experimental approaches, preliminary findings as well as receive feedback from a number of domain experts, academics, government officials and other researchers in attendance.Contextualising the ResearchIn 2017, Indonesia scored around 50 per cent on the Global Financial Inclusion Index, which means that half of the Indonesian adult population does not access formal financial services. As discussed by guest domain experts from the Indonesian Financial Services Authority (OJK) and MicroSave during the introductory sessions of the Research Dive, several known factors such as geographic coverage and lagging regional infrastructure inhibit the pace at which cohorts within the population become financially included, but knowledge gaps still remain. Across the country, new data are being generated that provide opportunities for financial institutions and those in the policy-making domain to understand the needs of different communities in order to increase access to financial services and products.What better way to dive into this critical research but with a mixed group of passionate participants, bringing together skills and experiences across academia, government and the private sector combined. Examining the various dimensions of financial inclusion, what financial inclusion means for Indonesian society in particular, as well as the progress made and challenges that are ahead, four research areas were outlined to help answer pressing policy and development questions:Measuring financial awareness and financial literacy through social mediaMeasuring financial access through formal financial and non-financial institutionsModelling gender-based differences in financial inclusionAssessing the digital opportunity impact on financial inclusionInsights and Takeaways from the ResearchGuided by the expertise of four advisors who have conducted related research in areas of spatial econometrics (Rahma Fitriani, Ph.D. — Universitas Brawijaya); topic modelling (Edi Winarko, Ph.D. — Universitas Gadjah Mada); geographic information systems (Adityo Dwijananto, Humanitarian OpenStreetMap); and financial technology (Chaikal Nuryakin, Ph.D. — Universitas Indonesia), the teams spent three days hacking away at a mix of both new and traditional datasets.In a spirit of the event, all the teams worked hard and later took the opportunity to share some preliminary findings from their research:Team 1 — Measuring financial awareness through social mediaSocial media data contains a wealth of information on measures of financial inclusion. The team developed a model to process public tweets that contained finance- and money-related keywords to predict the level of financial awareness in seven cities, namely Medan, Jakarta, Bandung, Yogyakarta, Surabaya, Banten and Makassar. Initial analysis showed that Jakarta had the highest financial tweet ratio (the number of tweets containing financial attributes divided by all tweets), and there was a steady increasing trend throughout 2014 observed for six of the seven cities. Yogyakarta, however, was relatively stagnant and had the lowest financial tweet ratio.Datasets — anonymised 2014 Twitter data from seven major Indonesian citiesTeam 2 — Supply Side measurement of Financial InclusionThe second team explored the possibility of extending the calculation of the Financial Inclusion Index to the village level (in Pontianak) using non-financial channels such as post offices, convenience stores (Alfamart and Indomaret) as well as mapping their geographical proximity. A new Financial Inclusion Index at the village level covering both formal and non-formal channels was produced for the city, but could be extended to other areas as a proxy for Financial Inclusion metrics calculated from surveys. The team also found that, empirically, the proposed Financial Inclusion Index is in accordance with other related indicators such as GDP per capita and the Human Development Index.Datasets — (i) Location data of Banks, ATMs, Alfamart, Indomaret, and post offices in Pontianak obtained from Google Maps, (ii) 2016 National Survey on Financial Literacy and Inclusion (SNLIK), (iii) 2017 Population Data from the Indonesian National Board for Disaster Management and (iv) The Village Potential Statistics (PODES) 2014.Team 3 — Modelling Gender-Based Differences in Financial Inclusion: Rural Area AnalysisThis team pursued a pair of objectives: a) understanding the extent of financial inclusion disaggregated by gender in rural areas and b) quantifying the probability of being financially included based on gender in rural areas. Using explanatory variables such as gender, income, education, age, marital status and household size as well as response variables (from a 2016 Financial Services Authority Survey) such as savings, credit, insurance and investments, the team’s preliminary findings indicate that women (especially belonging to the higher income brackets) have the highest level of financial inclusiveness in rural areas. The team plans to expand their model to include urban areas to see whether gender-based differences may vary based on differences in settlement type.Team 4 — Measuring the Effects of Digital Opportunity on Financial InclusionThe fourth team looked at whether the growing adoption of digital technology can accelerate financial inclusion. Using 2017 Susenas data and about 90 million anonymised tweets from 2014, the team worked to model Financial Inclusion from this perspective. They developed three visualisations to show internet ratio, savings ratio and phone ratio at the regional level. The team found that digital opportunity is correlated with Financial Inclusion, but that high-density use of Twitter is not correlated with Financial Inclusion. The team suggested ways to reduce the digital divide between the western and eastern parts of the country and based on a literature review recommended the use of FinTech to deliver some social assistance.Datasets — (i) Susenas, 2017 (466 cities, 297,276 households) and (ii) anonymised 2014 Twitter data from seven citiesThe research continues…Being able to receive on-the-spot peer review from fellow researcher divers and experts is one of the many benefits of participating in these events. Furthermore, the dives are designed with the awareness that three days of research are not sufficient to generate polished models and approaches that can be immediately replicated or applied, and so participants are encouraged to use the feedback received to inform and refine their research. During the final presentations, we were happy to be joined by representatives from the Indonesian Government (the Financial Services Authority, Secretariat for the National Council for Financial Inclusion and Indonesian National Statistics Bureau), Indonesian Fintech Association and research think tanks who offered comments on how these research projects can be improved and possibly used to fast track financial inclusion efforts in the country.We were pleased to host all the participants, advisors and guest domain experts in this Research Dive on financial inclusion, and we look forward to reading the forthcoming technical papers being produced by the teams.The image to the left (with the VOC logo centered) attempts to depict the value of the Dutch East India Company in the year 1637. While positioned against an ancient-looking background, the message about its worth may be a bit abstract for some millenials who either cannot fathom the idea of such worth or have never heard of the company. These millennials, however, might be able to better understand the magnitude of the company’s worth if the story (using visual representation) is framed to include the names of a few modern companies that they are familiar with. The differences in box size also allow a rough comparison of each’s worth.Your data stories though do not need to be limited to framing, other techniques involve exploring the relationships within a dataset and then accentuating certain patterns and trends (see the other examples below). This is a necessary step to undertake before attempting to visualise any dataset, big or small.Modes of visualisationOnce the ‘angle’ of the story is determined from the dataset, the next step is to select the most effective mode to visualise it. Depending on the particular dataset and storyline, data visualisation can take on different modes, i.e. exploration, communication or observation.First, the exploration mode assists the audience in finding the story the data is trying to tell. Check out the example below that shows the fluctuation of housing prices across Indonesia.Source: Lody AndrianCovering the span of a few months, the dataset is complex and may not make much sense if presented solely in numbers to the average homebuyer or investor. By visualising the dataset, the intended user can easily compare housing prices in one region with another and explore whether or not a certain region has stable enough prices.Second, the communication mode entails using data to present a message or idea. This form is often used for infographics in journalism, as seen in the example below.Source: Lody AndrianThis infographic visualises different datasets under a common topic, with a view to informing an audience on a particular issue. It showcases data related to special needs schools in Jakarta, more specifically the gap between the number of special needs students and the number of facilities available for them. Using a combination of graphs, charts, statistics and graphics, this infographic aims to communicate the issue — substantiated with multiple visual aids — to relevant stakeholders.Third, the observation mode as the name suggests typically involves active monitoring of data in real time. Unlike the exploration and communication modes, it does not offer any direct interpretation or conclusion; it presents the data as is to help the audience keep track of updates as they occur. Pulse Lab Jakarta’s CycloMon platform, for instance, provides real-time data visualisations of cyclones around the world to help disaster management units with their preparedness and response efforts.Mapping the dynamics of urban living can be challenging for city planners, especially considering citizens increasing mobility in today’s world. With roughly half the population of Indonesia estimated to be residing in urban areas, urban development planning itself covers a broad scope, including ensuring access to health services, building water supply infrastructure and monitoring energy consumption. This demands extensive amount of time and research, and with new data sources on the rise, experimenting with different analytical approaches becomes necessary. Such was the atmosphere at the Lab’s recent Research Dive for Development, which this time around focused on Urban and Regional Development, and in the true spirit of its tradition, it was a packed three days of intense brainstorming and analysis.A hot topic among development practitioners, urban development planning has long been on the national agenda for countries looking to advance economically, socially and otherwise. And while much progress has been made over the past decades, the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is a raison d’être for new research and renewed discourse. Similarly, it has been the muse for this sixth research sprint at the Lab, which convened a diverse cadre of domain experts, academics and data analysts.As reminded by past participants during the first Research Dive Reunion held at the start of the year, despite the similarity in format, no two dives are the same. Each Research Dive features a new theme, new datasets, new participants, and as discussed below in the preliminary findings from this research, there are always new insights. Commencing on March 25 with a briefing on the datasets and concluding with final presentations on March 28, in this blog, we recap what took place and share a few key takeaways.Objectives, Analysis and FindingsThe participants were divided into four research teams, each tasked with taking on a specific aspect of urban and regional development and assigned a dataset. Specifically, the tasks included:Task 1: Designing regional development policy, by analysing social events, news media data and its network based on GDELT (a global news media monitoring platform).Task 2: Assessing the accessibility to (emergency) health facilities in Sumatra, by analysing different datasets including transportation infrastructure distribution and health facility locations.Task 3: Monitoring water access for water supply infrastructure planning, by analysing several datasets including municipal waterworks customer distribution data.Task 4: Inferring energy consumption towards urban development, by combining data on social media activity density and socio-economics statistics.Nevertheless, as with all research, identifying the research question and coming up with possible hypotheses are parts of the first phase into the foray. So under the guidance of specialist advisors and some of our own data analysts, the participants huddled in their groups and spent hours hacking away and dissecting respective datasets.Highlighted by many back and forth brainstorming exchanges, the research groups managed to assess the nature of each dataset assigned, examine relevant correlations, test out hypotheses, identify trends and patterns, and develop statistical models based on their observations that might be useful for informing urban and regional development planning. Then on the closing day, they took the floor to discuss their findings, policy recommendations as well as some of the challenges in front of their peers and invited guests.Below we sum up some of the key findings:TASK 1: The data from GDELT shows broadly that there is a correlation between newsroom reporting and actual social events on the ground, but in particular the analysis reveals that majority of the news covered by GDELT is related to physical activities such as demonstrations, disasters and crimes — and that different countries have different interests. For instance, a significant number of reports suggest that Malaysia and Singapore have an interest in the Indonesian regions of Sumatra and Kalimantan, while many GDELT reports produced by Australian media are about Bali. Also, the amount of news hashed by GDELT on Indonesia affects the number of tourists visiting Indonesia with different impact levels from one country to another. From a policy perspective, this may be used to identify subject matters for regional cooperation and economic growth in line with the Indonesian Government’s Medium Term Development Plan.TASK 2: Using road network maps, population distribution data, hospital/health centre distribution data, shelter locations, a digital elevation model and fire hotspot distribution, a series of analyses assessed the levels of exposure to two disasters of interest (flooding and haze) in Pekanbaru. The team also examined accessibility to health and potential evacuation facilities, for example the distance to main roads and distance to the city/district areas. The results can be used to propose ideal sites for shelter construction, as well as to map road networks that are either missing or need to be improved.TASK 3: The research team first derived a few observations from the results of two surveys from the Local Clean Water Company (PDAM) and the Indonesia Infrastructure Initiative (INDII), one of which included the fact that people in Northern Pontianak, West Kalimantan have limited access to clean water (and many of them have only one water source, while people with relatively higher income living in the southern regions have multiple water sources). Based on such observations, the team members tried to propose a potential solution with supporting evidences, which includes a list of alternative locations for water bank installations, supported by rainfall and population data. They hoped that combined with information from socio-economic surveys, these insights can help the Government to improve pipeline water access for low income communities.TASK 4: Analysing aggregated Twitter data, the research team observed a significant correlation between the energy consumption by districts and the daily activities of Twitter users. Additionally, there was a significant statistical relationship between the amount of tourist activities and energy consumption, so with those observations as well as the socio-economic variance within the population of Bali Province, the team built a statistical model that can infer the daily electricity consumption in Bali using daily Twitter activities with an accuracy rate of 95 per cent and higher.One question that keeps us on our toes is: How do we measure the impact of what we do at our data innovation lab? It’s a big question and one in which we have struggled throughout the years. Last year we had the privilege of working with Clear Horizon and SOLIDARITAS on setting up a results measurement framework for the Lab, and we debated long and hard about what accounts for “impact” in an innovation lab. Particular thanks go to Mark Fiorello from Solidaritas for his expert guidance and patience with the team at PLJ and for co-authoring this blog with us.So, what’s your impact?In particular, how do you measure impact in a lab that by design experiments, tests, prototypes, ditches failed prototypes… and typically hands over successful ones to partners for scaling up through their respective programmes? Whether these investments in experimentation result in significant positive change is a question very much worth asking, but that doesn’t mean it is a straightforward question to answer.In this blog post, we thought we’d share our own thoughts and experience on understanding our impact, in the hopes that it might be relevant for other organisations that are asking similar questions of themselves. This piece focuses on defining what impact means to us, but we hope this will be the start of a series documenting our attempts to measure how the lab has contributed to positive change.As we began to jot down a few key points, one of our favourite past reads came to mind — a thought piece by ODI Methods Lab that shows just how many different ways the term “impact” gets used, and that in its most colloquial use, “impact” is often interchangeable with other words such as “result”, “outcome”, and “effect”. This has led us to key lesson number 1: the first step of understanding impact is to define it in our own context. In other words, when we talk about “our impact” with others, we need to make sure we’re on the same page.Impact for us as an innovation lab means that not only are our methodologies and platforms taken up by others for use, but also that more and more of our collaborators since our early days are investing in innovative practice, whether it be by building their own data analytics team, getting their own human centered design experts on board or even just bringing in specific expertise in design and data before embarking on a new project. To phrase this another way, we wholeheartedly endorse the Methods Lab’s statement underscoring that “the scope of the definition of impact… must therefore be appropriately bounded”.Easy, right? If only!In the context of PLJ, we have encountered at least three main challenges when it comes to defining impact:Essentially, our core function as a data innovation lab is to experiment and apply our methods across a range of different issues. Ironically enough for a data lab, one of our main challenges is when we are asked to quantify the effects of our work using measurement changes common for other development initiatives, such as number of beneficiaries, the accumulated quantitative use of a platform, or the number of projects commissioned. We can certainly keep track of all of these aspects, but should they be used to define the value of what we do?The changes we might consider to be “impact” may not necessarily be apparent at the time we set out to do something. This is consistent with the OECD’s definition of impact as “positive and negative, primary and secondary long-term effects produced by a development intervention, directly or indirectly, intended or unintended” (in other words: basically anything that is an “effect”, as long as it occurs over the “longer term”).As a Lab, we typically contribute to changes we might consider to be “impact”, rather than cause them. This means that in the PLJ context, we can categorically reject the definition of “impact” used by certain donors or organisations, which reserve the term impact for results or effects that are caused by or attributable to a certain intervention. Moreover, impact in this sense often comes at a later stage, so the notion that as a data innovation lab we ought to be involved in measuring impact in the full life cycle of an innovation falls short of genuine.So where do these challenges leave us?Based on our reflections alongside our partners over the years, in the context of PLJ, we think there are three main types of “impact” (or, if we want to use a slightly less debatable term, we are also comfortable referring to these as “influence”) where our work brings value to our broader stakeholders. In our recently published 2017 Annual Report (see pages 42 and 43), we describe each of these impacts using examples of projects we’ve worked on, and have here summarised them for the purpose of this blog.First is “Operational Impact”, which we basically define as the effect our analytics or prototypes have on the ways that our partner/client organisations work. Improvements in operational effectiveness and/or efficiency due to the adoption or adaption of PLJ-inspired products, or due to an increased understanding of human-centered design issues, are among the aspects we consider highly relevant as PLJ’s “impact” — our Haze Gazer platform, which has been adopted by the Executive Office of the President of the Republic of Indonesia, is one example.Second is “Methodological Impact”, which we define as the effects that we have on the practice and application of data science. If we have somehow contributed to other people or organisations using existing data in new ways or using new datasets or new analytical methods to address existing problems, we also consider that to be “impact” — our approach of using Twitter data to infer commuting statistics in Greater Jakarta is another case.Finally, there is “Ecosystemic Impact”, which is important given our mandate to support data innovation more broadly. We are very conscious of the fact that we exist as part of a much more complex ecosystem of data innovation — not only in Indonesia, but also regionally and globally. Where we contribute to key stakeholders participating differently within this ecosystem, for example in terms of new collaboration or further research, we consider that to be an important form of “impact”. Our Research Dives are a good example of this: several former participants have continued the work they started during our dives and submitted their own papers for conferences and academic publications.What’s next?Well, uh, continuing to actually measure impact. We know that defining and keeping track of our impact is an ongoing process. The results measurement framework that we’ve developed with our friends from Clear Horizon and SOLIDARITAS has equipped us with a set of tools that helps us keep track of progress and identify significant changes as a result of our work. One of the approaches that we’re trying out now is tracing what happens to our data analytics platforms, such as Haze Gazer and VAMPIRE, once they are handed over to our partners. We’re also testing this approach to track the impact of some of our human-centred research. We’ll share what we find with you later this year — stay tuned!Micro merchants — the small shop owners, street food vendors, and many others like them — make up the backbone of Indonesia’s economy, yet many of them are often excluded from financial services. Can financial technology accelerate their financial inclusion? With the support of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) Australia and in collaboration with the Indonesia Fintech Association (AFTECH), Pulse Lab Jakarta launched a research project called ‘Banking on Fintech : Financial Inclusion for Micro Enterprises in Indonesia’ to promote resilience and growth within Indonesia’s unbanked micro business sector. While previous studies have focused on understanding why most low-income communities remain unbanked, we decided to build on the work of some pioneering fintech companies in Indonesia that are reaching micro merchants and learn from the experiences of early fintech adopters.According to the Ministry of SMEs and Cooperatives, roughly 99 per cent of all businesses in Indonesia are micro enterprises — the small shop owners, street food vendors, and merchants who earn a maximum of IDR300million per year. Despite their crucial role in the economy, micro enterprises remain vulnerable to shocks and are unable to grow due to a lack of access to formal financial services. In line with the Government of Indonesia’s financial inclusion agenda, the growing fintech industry has acknowledged the importance of catering to the financial needs of micro enterprises to accelerate financial inclusion. However, the Indonesia Fintech Association (AFTECH) also acknowledged that unbanked micro enterprises are a challenging segment, given that they are harder to reach than small or medium enterprises.Despite this challenge, we have taken note of a number of digital financial service providers in Indonesia that have started to reach previously unbanked micro enterprises. Our main research question therefore was: Why, and how, despite the same obstacles and behavioural barriers, have some micro enterprises made the leap and began to use these services?Our emphasis on behavioural insights stems from the realisation that: while financial inclusion efforts should be pioneered by higher-level policymaking, it must also be supported with a clear understanding of the realities of the target users. We employed a human-centred design process in our field research with 116 respondents across Jakarta, Bekasi, Sukabumi, Ciseeng, and Banyumas, most of whom are micro merchants who are either users or agents of mobile savings accounts, mobile payments, and peer to peer group lending. Through the research, we uncovered the mental barriers hampering micro merchants from accessing financial services, their fintech adoption journey, and the enabling factors that help them to actively use and benefit from fintech.Beyond understanding the users’ realities, we learned that, for micro merchants, the way in which fintech services are introduced and implemented is more influential than details of the technology itself in micro merchants’ decision to adopt a digital financial service. Therefore, rather than recommending product or service ideas, for which there are many latent needs, we opt to translate our insights into design principles. The design principles embody our understanding of the finance and technology-related attitudes and behaviours of micro merchants, particularly the enabling factors that equip them to adopt digital financial services. These principles can be applied by fintech companies as design directives in developing and testing a variety of solutions for micro enterprises in Indonesia.Following this research, we have teamed up with the United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) to launch a Challenge Fund to promote and accelerate usage of fintech for the financial inclusion of microenterprises. Details of the Challenge Fund are available here and applications are open until October 1st, 2018.We hope that our research is useful not only for those interested in applying to the challenge fund, but also for anyone committed to making financial inclusion a reality in Indonesia.Happy reading!Feel free to download a copy of the report here.Pulse Lab Jakarta is grateful for the generous support from the Government of Australia.We recently had the distinct pleasure of hosting a couple of colleagues from Data Science Campus (DSC), a data innovation initiative attached to the Office of National Statistics of the United Kingdom. It was inspiring to learn about how the Campus works across government to support data science and ultimately better delivery. Below we share a few highlights and an area of collaboration between Pulse Lab Jakarta (PLJ) and the Campus.A Campus Dedicated to Advancing Data Science in GovernmentMuch like the labs in the Global Pulse network, Data Science Campus is tapping into the rich streams of data that are being generated by new technology to inform public policy and programme delivery. Sonia and Ioannis, a couple of data scientists at the Campus, joined us for two days of workshopping and brainstorming. They also presented on the Campus’ project portfolio and governance to representatives from the Indonesian Central Bureau of Statistics, the Indonesian Institute of Statistics, and the Ministry of National Development Planning.The way the Campus interacts with the rest of the UK Government was of particular interest to us here at PLJ, as we are a joint initiative of the Government of Indonesia and the United Nations. What could we learn from the way the Campus supports policy and delivery units?The Campus mixes demand-driven in-house data innovation projects with support to managers and budding data scientists across government through training, mentorship and an accelerator programme. The ‘data science movement’ component of the Campus’ work was also interesting, as this begins to answer the question of how to scale one’s impact without growing the team, an ongoing topical debate in the Lab.A Data Science MovementThe training courses range from seminars for public sector managers on the value of data science — the art of the possible — which helps to scope projects, to short courses on R and Python, as well as machine learning. The Campus has also worked with three universities to develop a Master of Science in Data Analytics for Government which is available to public servants for free, both as a complete course as well as discrete modules.Sonia Williams from Data Science Campus giving an overview of the Campus’ projects.The mentorship component is delivered by a consortium of organisations, of which the Campus is a member, to support project teams across government in overcoming challenges and delivering results using data science. The accelerator, however, is more focussed on individuals, as the intent of the programme is to build skills as well as make progress on a research problem. Applicants must demonstrate an intent to learn, arriving with some basic skills in R or Python, as well as have access to the necessary data. From here, the Campus gets these individuals to a sufficient level of skills with which they can complete their projects. Exit from the accelerator is connected to gaining skills not completing the project, although strong progress is the norm.This blog cannot fully cover the range of data science wizardry going on at the Campus, so we are only highlighting the activities that sounded like a good match for Indonesia and the UN. We would be interested to hear from public servants and UN employees across Southeast Asia if PLJ replication of any of the above would be of interest.Boaty McBoatfaceThanks to the workshops, PLJ and DSC have discovered a lot of options for joint projects; one that is especially interesting is working with data from the global marine vessel identification system, called AIS.The Campus has already made great progress with this data set, for example investigating port utilisation. The Global Pulse Lab network has also been dabbling with AIS data, for example the initial analysis of port network connectivity conducted with a team of inter-disciplinary researchers at a recent Research Dive, and a study on rescue patterns of migrants and refugees in the Mediterranean Sea.There are plenty of other project options, but these will be the subjects of future posts. One thing is for sure: data science in government is here to stay.In communities across the world that are prone to natural disasters, having an effective disaster response strategy in place is vital to save lives and support affected communities. To successfully coordinate what are often complex disaster relief efforts, governments, disaster response authorities and humanitarian agencies need useful, up-to-date information that can be easily accessed.Building on our cyclone monitoring prototype, our team spent the past couple months developing an integrated, big data analytics prototype to provide timely insights that can aid logistics planning and information management after natural disasters, including cyclones, earthquakes, hurricanes and floods in Indonesia and countries in the Pacific region. In a few weeks, we’ll be launching it for testing with end users to better shape its future development. Here we take a look at the main features and the prototype’s potential for global impact.Nicknamed DisasterMon, the current prototype features three data insight layers related to logistics planning, social media communication and socio-economic variables, which are based on multiple data sources (including open data platforms, national statistics and social media) that we hope to add to over the coming months. Albeit plenty of data sources exist that can aid in humanitarian assistance and disaster relief efforts, many of them are scattered across different databases and institutions.With benefits for different stakeholders, such as local disaster authorities (insights provided by the tool can be paired with on-the-ground information to support analysis and decision making); humanitarian agencies (registered users can export their own data set to a custom layer to generate easy-to-interpret map visualisations); and the general public (citizens can view the latest information about areas affected and ongoing activities from Twitter verified news-sharing accounts), DisasterMon seeks to enhance natural disaster response at the local, national and international levels using big data. It also has potential to influence future development of automated real-time disaster monitoring systems.Against the backdrop of the 2018 Earthquake in Palu, Sulawesi, Indonesia, below we explore what each feature offers:Optimising Planning LogisticsTransporting valuable resources to disaster-affected areas or planning the best evacuation route are often hampered by several factors, for instance lack of knowledge about local road conditions, the length of time the journey may take and even topography, all of which can influence one’s choice of route. The logistics layer of DisasterMon provides information on road type, level of elevation, distance between points and estimated length of journey.For example, one can see from the screenshot below that getting from Kasiguncu Airport (a domestic airport) to SMK PGRI Palu (a school near the site of the earthquake) may take five hours of driving, and the elevation of the road peaks at more than 900 meters. Users can weigh their options by choosing alternative points of origin and destinations. This feature of the tool relies on a pair of OpenStreetMap and OpenRouteService APIs.Taking into Account Socio-Economic VariablesIn many instances, the people most affected by a natural disaster are the poor and vulnerable. Having an understanding about population density, GDP per capita and other socio-economic characteristics of a certain region can help inform authorities’ estimates of supplies and resources needed, as well as help to target their allocation at the most vulnerable areas. Visualising data from 1960 to 2017 below, the tool depicts information about the total number of people living in the region, GDP per capita and the poverty headcount ratio based on the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery, World Bank data.Getting Updates from Social MediaMany people rely on social media as an information source during and after natural disasters to get updates and reduce uncertainty. Wrapping your head around the deluge of photographs, captions and videos shared however can take some time. Applying data mining approaches, the tool provides frequent updates on cities affected, the number of people injured, the number of casualties, the number of people evacuated and information about shelter locations based on information shared by Twitter verified accounts. DisasterMon also extracts various patterns to provide relevant information, such as the number of tweets related to the Palu earthquake over several days, popular words and terms being used to describe the event, as well as most shared videos from verified accounts.Visualising Data in a Custom LayerNoted earlier, one of the benefits for registered users is the ability to export their own data set to be visualised by DisasterMon. The data fed into the tool is not saved long-term, but users can capture screenshots and conduct analysis based on quickly generated map visualisation of complex data sets. As of now, the tool can process files in GeoJSON and Marker formats.Seen in the custom layer below, DisasterMon bounds the geographical area affected by the 2018 earthquake and tsunami in Sulawesi and highlights areas where disaster relief agencies are active — the darker green indicates a larger presence of disaster relief agencies — based on 4W data received by OCHA and AHA Centre from different cluster leads. A cluster is a sector-specific coordination group of humanitarian organisations, both UN and non-UN, focused on strengthening preparedness and technical capacity to respond to humanitarian emergencies.What’s NextIn the coming weeks, the prototype will be launched for testing with tutorial materials available for governments, disaster authorities, humanitarian agencies and general members of the public. The team is also exploring the possibilities of developing other layers for volcano and wildfire disaster events, as well as evaluating how best to incorporate additional data sets such as mobile network data to provide insights. Data is the lifeblood of this tool and to reach its global potential, critical hazard-related national and global data is essential. DisasterMon relies on multiple data sets that are available globally through public APIs, in conjunction with other data sets that Pulse Lab Jakarta has access to through data partnerships.The prototype is modular. If you have ideas of how it can be improved, perhaps more specific for your country, please get in touch with us: plj@un.or.idManaging Relevant Information in the Aftermath of Natural Disasters: Launching PLJ’s Latest Data Analytics PlatformPulse Lab JakartaFollowMay 28 · 6 min readGuests exploring the logistics planning feature of the platform during the launch eventResponding to natural disasters effectively is vital for saving lives and limiting disaster impact. While each natural disaster comes with its unique conditions, two challenges generally exist: critical information pertaining to the situation on the ground tends to be scattered among responders; and valuable time often gets lost in the immediacy of these events as authorities prepare response strategies. Pulse Lab Jakarta recently launched its latest research prototype — an automated, open source platform that integrates multiple non-traditional data sets to aid logistics planning and information management following natural disasters. Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator in the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UN OCHA), was the keynote speaker at the event, which was attended by a wide audience across the development and humanitarian sectors.During its early development and prototyping, the platform was called DisasterMon (a portmanteau of the words disaster and monitoring). However, as the prototype was refined and new features were added, it evolved more into managing information to better inform response following natural disasters. Inspired by how the human mind processes information, the platform was rebranded and given the name MIND (which stands for managing information for natural disasters, namely cyclones, earthquakes, tsunamis, floods, volcanic eruptions and wildfires).The Information GapsThe platform is built on an automated data pipeline, allowing it to stream and analyse several non-traditional data sets all in one place. This data pipeline is triggered based on disaster alerts received from the Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System (GDACS), which is a global system aimed at closing information and coordination gaps.While speaking at the launch, Ms. Mueller underscored that “Governments, disaster response authorities, NGOs as well as national and international agencies need useful, accurate and up to date data that can be accessed easily and fast. Yet getting accurate data on who are the people that need humanitarian assistance; how many there are; what kind of assistance they need is still one of the biggest challenges faced by the humanitarian system.”Though information that can inform disaster authorities and citizens generally begins to generate right after a disaster hits, such information tends to be managed independently by different responders and information access comes with its own challenges. As an open source platform, MIND is designed to address these challenges, by publicly providing stakeholders with timely insights on affected areas, the needs of communities, among others.MIND’s Data PipelineMain FeaturesTwitter: near real-time updatesThe platform analyses Twitter data, in particular by examining public geotagged tweets that are within a disaster’s geographical parameters, known as a bounding box. The focus is on the location and words of each tweet. Users are able to explore the content of the tweets and get a sense of the number of related tweets and popular keywords. This information is neatly visualised within the platform to enable further analysis, for instance what messages can be inferred from popular keywords, as well as what the aggregate timestamps and locations of the tweets suggest.OpenStreetMap and OpenRouteService: logistics planningThe platform integrates a pair of APIs from OpenStreetMap and OpenRouteService (an open source route planner developed by Heidelberg Institute for Geoinformation Technology at Heidelberg University) to help identify suitable routes for the transportation of aid and resources. This feature provides information on strategic Points of Interest (PoI) such as schools, hospitals, government buildings, airports and ports, which are important for exploring options for origin and destination points. With this information, users (especially responders who are unfamiliar with the topography of an area) can plan their journey, including determining the type of transportation to use based on the road surface and the amount of gas needed based on estimated travel distance. The feature also details the duration of travel, road type and elevation level.Wikipedia: basic factsheetHumanitarian fact sheets normally exist in tables and forms, and tend to be based on specific organisation themes and sectoral focus. It’s a useful tool to inform responders about basic information such as population size, population density, age group, religion and infrastructure within the affected locale. Recognising that Wikipedia is a popular go-to site for many internet users who are seeking to obtain general information in a simple summary format, the platform adopts its style. Beyond its purpose as a fact sheet, this feature demonstrates the possibility of gathering useful, background information from a variety of sources through an API in a fully automated process.News API: casualty countIn reports on catastrophic events, we observed that news sources are inclined to define their severity in terms of the number of casualties. This feature of the platform incorporates a text processing algorithm to extract news articles that are related to a given disaster from a credible news API; an article at minimum should match up with the type of disaster that has occurred and the country affected. Based on the set of articles identified, the algorithm then proceeds to extract figures from the articles that describe an estimation of the number of casualties (words such as victims, fatalities and deaths are used as proxies). Articles are analysed on a daily basis and the number of casualties are plotted on a graph to monitor changes over time.Google Trends: search resultsGoogle searches from within impacted communities can help authorities to understand the concerns and needs of citizens affected. The Google Trends feature that is integrated in the platform gives a sense of what topics people are talking about and the type of content they are searching for. This is an important communication tool that can help government disaster authorities to better contextualise the information they share with the public throughout the disaster response phase. As seen in the screen capture below, it shows overall interest in a particular search topic over time, rising topics and queries, as well as statistics on related topics.Open Invitation for User TestingWe’re grateful to our colleagues from the development and humanitarian sectors who attended the launch, including representatives from UNOCHA, AHA Centre and the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.From left to right: Adelina Kamal (Executive Director of the AHA Centre); Derval Usher (Pulse Lab Jakarta Head of Office); and Ursula Mueller (Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator in UNOCHA).The platform is intended to be used by various stakeholders and has a customised layer that allows users to export and visualise their own data set (acceptable in GeoJSON and Marker formats). We were also delighted to collaborate with Humanitarian Data Exchange, whose data set (similar to UN OCHA’s 3W products) was used to illustrate the benefits of the customised layer. Seen in the example below, it visualises data that is related to the International Aid Transparency Initiative, showing details about past and ongoing projects within affected areas and implementing partners involved.The platform is designed to complement existing disaster response tools and can be modified to meet the specific needs of an organisation. We’re putting the final touches to the platform, afterwhich it’ll be publicly available. We encourage stakeholders across different sectors to participate in its user testing and share your feedback with us — plj@un.or.id.Mapping Financial Services Points Across IndonesiaPulse Lab JakartaFollowMar 28 · 5 min readIndonesia has made significant progress in improving individuals and small businesses’ access to financial services in recent years. Across different socio-economic cohorts however, access to financial services remains unequal and limited as indicated in the 2017 Global Financial Index that examines how adults save, borrow, make payments and manage financial risks. Accordingly, numerous efforts have been made to research and understand the myriad of demographic barriers and behaviours that hinder access to financial services. Focusing on how to support policymakers in improving financial services points’ availability and access in terms of proximity, Pulse Lab Jakarta partnered with the Secretariat of The National Council for Financial Inclusion (SNKI) to design an interactive geospatial mapping tool with the aim of charting the various financial services points across the country’s archipelago.Prototyped using data from Yogyakarta City, Yogyakarta and Bima District, West Nusa Tenggara, the tool visualises financial services points and existing gaps based on socio-economic infrastructure and financial services offered.The idea for such a financial access map evolved out of discussions with SNKI, in which they expressed an interest in mapping financial services points (both existing and potential ones) which can aid their financial inclusion national agenda. Together with SNKI and Women’s World Banking (WWB), we explored a few ideas and fine-tuned them along the way, resulting in a prototype visualisation dashboard.Developing the visualisation dashboardMultiple datasets were used to develop the interactive visualisation dashboard, enabling policymakers to explore data layers and indicators that are relevant for improving financial access, and more broadly financial inclusion. These data sets range from financial and telecommunications data to geospatial and demographic data, which have been collected by Government institutions such as, Financial Services Authority (OJK), the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology, Statistics Indonesia (BPS), and National Team for the Acceleration of Poverty Reduction (TNP2K) to name a few.At the start of the design phase, our team surveyed a variety of sources to figure out: where the financial services points are located; how long it takes for people to reach financial services points; as well as what are the factors influencing the provision of financial services in various regions. To understand the disparity in financial services provided in Indonesia, we acknowledge these are some key factors to consider.Together with SNKI and WWB, we developed the prototype over a few months (April to November 2018) using data from Yogyakarta city and Bima district in West Nusa Tenggara, which covers 32 sub-districts and 236 kelurahan or villages. Considering that SNKI will ultimately be responsible for managing and scaling up the tool once prototyping is complete, we agreed it would be beneficial for them to take the lead in gathering the data needed for the map. PLJ and WWB thus acted as technical partners to assist with coordination.Better granularity on financial accessBy visualising the information, we sought to enhance policymakers’ analysis and decisions towards the broader objective of financial inclusion. The tool features indicators beyond the conventional measurements of financial inclusion, for instance branches per capita or ATMs per 100,000 people — which typically do not factor in where people live in relation to financial services points.Important information related to financial services points were added and categorised into Financial Access Points (FAP) and Potential Access Points (PAP). Eight indicators were integrated for the financial access points, namely: the availability and locations of State banks, Regional banks (BPD), Private banks, Joint Venture banks, Sharia banks (BPR Syariah), Banking agents, Cooperatives and ATMs. The potential access points such as the locations of Post offices and Grapari office/TCash merchants were also included.As availability and access to financial products and services are also influenced by other factors, the team included contextual data on socio-economic and infrastructure indicators to create data insights layers on total adult population, access points per 1000 adults, driving time from access points and network coverage. The size of the adult population and access points per 1000 adults can help policymakers understand population density in certain areas, which can then be compared to the availability of financial services to estimate inequality in access to financial services points.We provided a data layer on network coverage, considering that one of the main challenges for financial services provision is the lack of physical infrastructure to accommodate financial services such as bank branches, ATMs and micro-finance institutions. This feature is expected to help identify potential areas that are ready (but have not yet been served) in terms of physical infrastructure to accommodate financial services.Down to the village levelAs an archipelago, Indonesia has unique challenges in terms of financial access geographical coverage, compounded by disparities between urban and rural areas. A financial access map with information down to the village level has the potential to help policymakers make informed decisions that are attuned with the context of both urban and rural areas. This is especially important if the Government is to achieve the national financial inclusion target of ensuring that 75 per cent of adult Indonesians have access to formal financial services by 2019.We acknowledge that there are many barriers to financial inclusion, ranging from the availability of services to more complex behavioural barriers; however the map is intended to provide a better understanding of the availability of financial services and help understand potential factors hindering access to formal financial services provision — both of which can help bring financial services within closer reach for citizens and small businesses. The map is not designed to be an independent tool to illuminate issues related to access to financial services, but may complement existing research to further identify challenges related to accessing financial services in Indonesia.What’s nextThe visualisation dashboard is designed with a modular orientation to accommodate additional data sets. Building the prototype, we only used data from two districts in Indonesia, which allowed us to do rapid prototyping and testing. Nevertheless to scale up the Indonesian Financial Access Map across the country, relevant data for other parts of the country will be required.To enhance the map and its functionalities, more information can be incorporated, such as data from financial services agents, PT Pegadaian, PPOB (Payment Point Online Banks), Merchant Network and Fintech Providers. There’s also the possibility of adding other data insight layers based on poverty, unemployment, electricity infrastructure, internet signal strength, distance between branches and agents, literacy data, and gender analysis to provide extensive information on factors influencing the access and provision of financial services and products across different regions.We were happy to hand over the prototype of the interactive geospatial financial access map to the National Council for Financial Inclusion (DNKI), where it’ll be enhanced for future usage at national-scale for more informed and timely policy making. Once ready, the map will be made available to the public. Meanwhile, check out our video below to see more features of the map.Analysing Transportation Data from Ride-Hailing Services to Improve Transport IntegrationPulse Lab JakartaFollowApr 12 · 5 min readJalan Thamrin in Central JakartaTechnology has changed the way citizens go about everyday activities. Ride-hailing apps especially have been a game-changer, enabling more convenient pick-ups and drop-offs at affordable rates. Pulse Lab Jakarta in partnership with Grab, a ride-hailing, ride sharing, food delivery and logistics services technology company, has been investigating how anonymised data generated from customers’ use of these services can be leveraged to improve efficiency in the transportation system. This blog looks at the analysis we’ve done so far to understand the dynamics of ride-hailing in Greater Jakarta and shares some other research in the pipeline.Jakarta, 12 April 2019 — Ride-hailing apps have significantly transformed transportation in Indonesia, yet there is much research to be done on their potential to support national development goals. In Greater Jakarta for instance, not everyone uses public transport as some commuters prefer private transport for reasons of convenience. Having data-supported insights on segments that are underserved by both public and private transport services can, therefore, help city planners and policymakers develop an integrated transport system.We started off by crunching anonymised driver’s GPS traces in Greater Jakarta during August 2018 to get an understanding about ride-hailing inflows/outflows at the sub-district level. To better communicate the results of the analysis, our team generated a set of interactive visualisations:Traffic patterns in Greater Jakarta AreaThe visualisation below shows traffic patterns in Greater Jakarta as inferred from Grab’s anonymised GPS data. A dot represents total traffic flow for a sub-district: the green dot indicates higher traffic flow into the destination (inflow) and the purple dot represents higher traffic flow going out of the destination (outflow) or equal inflow and outflow.Differences in traffic flows during weekdays and weekendsThe visualisation below compares traffic flows during weekdays and weekends. We observed differences in traffic patterns in several sub-districts. For example sub-district Menteng, one of the busiest office and business areas in Jakarta, shows higher traffic during weekdays compared to weekends. An opposite trend is seen in commercial and tourist areas, like Bekasi Selatan and Bogor Tengah sub-districts. The colour maps the intensity of traffic in a given sub-district. The purple colour indicates lower traffic and gradually changes to green for higher traffic flows.The 2018 Asian Games ImpactWhen the Asian Games took place in Jakarta last year, we saw an opportunity to further explore these dynamics. With sports venues in Jakarta and Palembang, the Games attracted more than 80,000 foreign visitors. To investigate the impact to the services offered by Grab, we established an index based on a timeline before (March-July 2018) and during (18 August to 2 September) the event. Grab had created more than 100 customised points of interest (POIs) to ensure the smooth pick up and drop off of passengers and goods at Asian Games venues in Jakarta and Palembang. We examined the flows to and from these POIs, as well as associated revenues for drivers operating in Jakarta, Bogor, Depok, Tangerang and Bekasi (Jabodetabek) area and Palembang. Here’s what we found interesting:During the Games, driver partners operating in Jabodetabek and Palembang received an average increase of 24 per cent in daily fare revenue. For specific services, GrabBike driver partners had the highest average increase in daily revenue (26 per cent); followed by GrabCar and GrabExpress driver partners both with an average increase of 25 per cent in daily fare revenue; then GrabFood driver partners saw an average increase of around 21 per cent.Research In The PipelinePulse Lab Jakarta (PLJ) is pleased to be partnering with Grab and continues to explore ways to leverage new streams of data to inform public policy and sustainable development. Going forward, PLJ will act as Regional Data Partner for Grab-UN research partnerships, and we are happy to be the data analytics partner within the UN system. The Asian Games provided a unique opportunity to analyse data on Grab’s services with a view to promoting economic growth and resilience at the subnational and national levels. Our ambition is to further collaborate with other partners to investigate areas of urban dynamics through the use of data from ride-hailing services, for instance to:1. Infer information about road conditions using data from drivers’ motion and location sensors. This has the potential for greater impact, since the approach can be replicated in other Indonesian cities, as well as in cities across Southeast Asia where Grab is operational.2. Investigate trips from public transport stations and pickup/dropoff points to examine how they vary according to weather conditions, traffic congestion, time, day of the week and modes of transportation. This is an essential component for understanding the first and last mile needs of users, which can provide insights to improve public-private transport integration.We have used open source data features in developing the visualisation, again this makes it easy for the approaches to be replicated in other cities. Our research team will be diving into these research projects in the coming months and we’re open to other suggestions. Do you have ideas of how we can leverage transportation data to address a challenge in your city? Get in touch with us!The Bahasa Indonesia version of the blog is available here.City governments nowadays are adopting sophisticated technologies and near real-time data to improve planning and service delivery to enhance citizens’ quality of life. Known as the smart city approach, the aspect of the discourse regarding women has focused on improving mobility. However in order to be able to navigate through these fast-advancing, urban cities, women sometimes have to develop their own safety mechanisms because smart cities do not always mean safe cities. Pulse Lab Jakarta recently teamed up with UN Women to conduct research on how women navigate public transportation in the evening time. Aptly called the After Dark research, in this blog we provide a glimpse of what’s included in the final report, as well as the link to the full final report.The overarching goal of the After Dark research was to understand the mobility patterns and perceptions of safety among women workers who regularly travel at night. The research was guided by the following questions:How do women perceive safety when using public transportation at night?What factors influence women’s perception of safety when travelling at night?What are the challenges that impact women’s mobility and travel choices?How can transit systems be improved to encourage safe transit for women travelling at night?Framing the ResearchThere’s a scarcity of research on the safety of women who work night shifts in small retail industries and use public transportation to commute at night in urban areas. In Indonesia, this group of women is quite significant, as the Ministry of Finance reports that they make up around 40 per cent of this sector’s workforce. The focus of the After Dark research was therefore narrowed to focus on the experiences of women who may be employed as shop attendants, cashiers, restaurant servers and in other small business enterprises.To expand the understanding about women’s safety and mobility choices in urban areas beyond the Greater Jakarta locale, the research was conducted in Medan, Semarang and Surabaya. These three cities all have modern public transportation infrastructure and are popular destinations for local migrant workers who move around in search of better job opportunities. This research complements the 2017 Safety Audit that UN Women conducted in Jakarta, which in addition to identifying risk factors and impact, elaborated on the underlying social norms and beliefs that influence women’s safety in public spaces.This After Dark research nonetheless differs in that it focuses on the individual experience rather than the systemic factors; it delves into what “being safe” means for women who regularly travel at night; and it examines the emotions and beliefs influencing women’s travel choices. The research was thus designed to gain insights about every aspect of a woman’s travelling experience from the first mile to the last mile; and every stop in between. The objective of this research was not necessarily to arrive at statistically representative findings; instead we sought to glean and mine insights to fill the existing knowledge gap about the experiences of women who travel at night using public transportation. The insights are also intended to complement existing studies that are related and inform alternative intervention designs.The Research ApproachWe approached this research with the understanding that a woman’s mobility, for instance, returning home from work at night, should not be fragmented into safe and unsafe dilemmas — every part of the journey should be safe. We also believe that women should have the right to safely experience the cities they live in and access the resources they have to offer to reach their full potential as citizens.A total of 37 women respondents from three cities participated in the research. These women recorded their travel experience over four days in a diary, which served as a springboard for our researchers to conduct further in-depth interviews. As part of the research, a few of the respondents were shadowed on their journey home at night, which provided researchers with an actual, real-life context to help synthesise information and analyse findings. Preliminary findings from the fieldwork were shared in a co-design workshop with a diverse group of participants to obtain feedback and elicit ideas for intervention opportunities.The report below describes the insights that were uncovered following rounds of synthesis and analysis sessions conducted based on the information collected during both the field research and co-design workshop.From Challenges into OpportunitiesWe found that the respondents’ perceptions of safety exist on a spectrum — it is not simply a dichotomy of being safe or unsafe. While their overall nighttime travel experiences are influenced by a range of factors, the quality of public infrastructure, efficiency of transportation services and women’s own sense of familiarity with their surroundings stand out. Regardless of how the women perceived travelling at night to be, they all acknowledged that it was part of what they had to deal with having to work night shifts.For most of the respondents we met with, they highlighted that job options are limited and suggested that they’re better off earning a regular income working at night than nothing at all. Instead of limiting their mobility due to security concerns, they try to find ways to keep going such as building their own protection mechanisms. These mechanisms help them to reduce dependence on friends, family, fellow passengers and onlookers when travelling at night. The main challenge that emerged is two-fold: it is about how to reduce the burden that is placed on women to maintain their safety, and what steps can be taken to build safe and inclusive cities.We identified five opportunity areas for intervention:Repositioning Organda (a land transportation organisation that was established by a Ministerial Decree in 1963) to lead the angkot reformation by implementing and monitoring vehicle and driving guidelines to meet safety standards.Reimagining designated angkot (a type of transportation that transports passengers in the city area with the use of small buses and passenger cars) stopsEncouraging street vendors to become street wardensDesigning a newcomer starter pack for migrant workersEnabling bystanders to take actionDiscussed in more detail in the report, these opportunity areas are meant to be explored alongside key stakeholders, such as transportation related government entities, infrastructure development companies in the private sector, grassroots community groups, as well as international organisations that are working towards creating safe and inclusive cities for all.Pulse Lab Jakarta and UN Women would like to encourage interested organisations to make use of the insights from this research to develop ideas that can be transformed into tangible, user-centered prototypes. We believe, through a consolidated effort, these opportunity areas for intervention in service delivery, transit improvement, stronger social support and campaign for active bystanders can become closer to reality. This is an open invitation from us.Happy Reading!The full report is available here for download.Communities Across Indonesia Still Face Water Problems: A Consolidated Effort is Necessary to Ensure Access to Clean WaterPulse Lab JakartaFollowMay 20 · 6 min readWater is fundamental for human survival, and a range of everyday activities depend on it. To sustain life, water needs to not only be available — accessibility and quality are also critical. Several factors however including improper disposal of industrial waste and household garbage contribute to water pollution and decrease citizens’ access to clean water. With the goal of exploring viable solutions that can improve citizens’ access to clean water and their holistic quality of life, Pulse Lab Jakarta and Kopernik teamed up to conduct research on this issue. This is a snapshot of some of our findings.Boasting the largest economy in Southeast Asia, Indonesia lags behind other countries in the region in terms of access to safe drinking water, according to the fifth ASEAN State of the Environmental report. The report highlighted that while other ASEAN Member States have shown notable improvements in this area, in Indonesia and Cambodia roughly half of the population still have limited access to clean water.When it comes to assessing the quality of water - colour, odour and taste are three important properties. In communities across Indonesia, the quality of water available may be affected by different factors. For example, soil, iron and chemical contamination may be present as discoloured water; odour may be caused by a high concentration of iron or chlorine or due to the presence of microscopic organisms; while an off-taste may indicate intrusion, such as saltwater.The Indonesia Infrastructure Initiative (IndII) conducted a water and sanitation service index survey throughout 22 Indonesian provinces. With Pulse Lab Jakarta analysing the aggregate data, from a total of 7,049 households, 2694 households (38 per cent) reported issues with the water quality, be it related to the colour, odour or taste, or any of these combinations.Water quality issues based on householdsWater discolouration was observed in a total of 2,327 households (33 per cent), which was significantly higher compared to households that reported experiencing water that had an odour (1312 households — 19 per cent) and a taste (1311 households — 19 per cent). These numbers translate to real-life dilemmas that affect citizens’ quality of life, ranging from hygiene-related issues (such as whether to use contaminated water for bathing and household cleaning) to health issues (such as whether the use of contaminated water is worth the risk of skin and gastrointestinal infections).Across the 22 provinces, issues related to water quality were mostly reported on the island of Sumatra, particularly in Jambi province where 84 percent of respondents noted having experienced issues related to at least one of the three properties. Examining the top 10 provinces with the highest percentage of water problems (measured in terms of water problem to normal water ratio), we found that the majority of these provinces are located in Sumatra. This presents an opportunity to further examine whether the quality of water in these provinces are affected by any distinct geological characteristics.Water problem to normal water ratio by provinceBroken down by the specific type of water problem, Sumatra also stood out with a high occurrence of discoloured water, notably with all but one province on the island scoring at least 45 per cent on this issue. With regards to issues related to odour and taste, the distributions on the island are more similar to other parts of the country (with the exception of Riau and Jambi provinces where these figures are noticeably higher). Outside of Sumatra, issues related to discoloured water are also generally higher than issues related to odour and taste.Distribution of water problems based on colour, odour and tasteCitizens’ proximity to a polluted water source is a common factor, especially for households that rely on groundwater or non-piped sources. Living near a factory, landfill or polluted river for example often come with such risk. In the same way, if housing areas are located near bodies of saltwater, there’s the possibility of saltwater intrusion. A study conducted in Cilacap, Central Java showed that in many instances the water quality from wells near Kaliyasa River was well below the acceptable standard, and researchers have hypothesised that polluted river waters may have also affected the groundwater quality.As the population in Indonesia increases, the demand for more housing facilities and improved infrastructure increases. To meet this demand, swamp lands and rice fields are sometimes cleared for the construction of new housing structures. Kopernik also conducted a survey on water quality in 2017, focusing on several housing areas and local government areas in Jakarta. There was a general assumption among the respondents that polluted water in their surroundings may be linked to nearby wells dug in areas that were previously rice fields or swamp lands, causing the water to be murky with a noxious odour.To cope with these water problems, citizens will normally make an attempt to purify the water using a variety of approaches that vary across the socio-economic spectrum. Citizens living in impoverished areas may opt for homemade water filtration such as using a palm fiber filtration method; while more affluent households may rely on water tanks equipped with filters to purify groundwater that has been extracted by a pump. Still, even in some communities where tap water is available, many Indonesians still have a proclivity to use groundwater or water from other non-piped sources to complement piped water supply (which is also prone to problems related to availability and quality). Whilst filters like these can remove certain impurities from the water for household use, whether or not the water is potable remains a concern.To address the issue of clean water access, the Government of Indonesia initiated an ambitious plan to increase piped water access from 17 per cent in 2015 to 60 per cent in 2019, as well as reduce dependency on non-piped water from 54 to 40 per cent in the same period. This plan included designing a strategic plan focused on improving access to piped water both in urban and rural areas; enhancing the financial, economic and human resource capacity of public water utilities; building stronger civil and enterprise partnerships; as well as coming up with innovations to ensure citizen’s continuous access to clean water supply.Now in 2019, it’ll be interesting to see how the Government’s efforts have progressed — what worked and what didn’t. In whichever case, a consolidated effort from multiple stakeholders will be key to ensuring and sustaining citizens’ access to clean water for all in line with Sustainable Development Goal 6 — (ensure access to water and sanitation for all). With regards to industrial and commercial enterprises, sensible regulations around management of waste disposal need to be put in place to make sure proper steps are taken to treat waste materials. The Ministry of Agrarian Affairs and Spatial Planning’s efforts to minimise land conversion, such as from swamps into housing facilities, remain vital in ensuring that proper evaluations are done beforehand. And citizens as the main beneficiaries, also have a paramount role to play, whether it be from proper waste management to avoid further water pollution or communicating their needs so that interventions can be better tailored to their communities.We’re keen to partner with other organisations that are working on ways to improve access to clean water supply across Indonesia, please get in touch with us if you’re interested! This article is a joint publication by Pulse Lab Jakarta and Kopernik.Whenever a top-down approach is applied to policy making, the pain points and needs for whom these policy decisions are being made often become secondary. Policies that are geared towards accelerating financial inclusion will also face the same challenges if they are not designed with the end users in mind. At the invitation of the Secretariat of the National Council for Financial Inclusion, Pulse Lab Jakarta and the Behavioural Insights Team recently ran a workshop on how to introduce human-centered design and behavioural science approaches to inform innovative financial inclusion policies. The workshop was anchored on one particular policy challenge: How might branchless banking users be encouraged to perform more deposit transactions via agents?Explaining how human-centered design (HCD) and behavioural science can complement each other was first on the agenda. HCD is a framework designed to solve problems by focusing on the human experience at every step of the process. Behavioral science on the other hand is an approach that examines the behaviour of humans and borrows from the fields of economics and psychology to understand how judgments and decisions are made. Both approaches aim to understand human behaviors and nudge them towards action. HCD places more emphasis on the experiences, emotions, and processes that users of a particular service go through and on involving end users in the development of solutions. Behavioural science projects place emphasis on evaluating the impact of any intervention on the target behavior.Revisiting Insights from the FieldTo better understand the experience of users in relation to financial services, exploratory research is part of the initial step. In the workshop, we used the findings from our recent Banking on Fintech research, coupled with lessons learned from BIT’s work on Reducing Tax Return Errors in Indonesia as practical case studies. The Indonesian Government has a goal of ensuring that 75 per cent of adults have access to formal financial services by the end of 2019, and to realise this goal the Government has made efforts to encourage more users to sign up for such services. One of these efforts has been through the use of branchless banking agents, which are third party personnel who deal with customers directly on behalf of a bank or a fintech service provider. By applying HCD approach, we were able to take a step back during the Banking on Fintech research to develop a thorough understanding about what challenges financial services users faced.We focused on the user journey of financial services early adopters, in particular to identify challenges, barriers, and other factors that affect their judgement and decisions. Our fieldwork revealed that most decisions taken by the users were influenced by bank agents, thus making bank agents an important and focal intermediary between service providers and customers. Learning from the experience of these agents, we found that their main challenge was ensuring that customers remain active and continue to perform transactions after registering — preventing dormant accounts was more difficult than recruiting customers.This insight highlighted a difference in outlook between policymakers and users; while the Government’s efforts are focused on increasing the number of new registrations, how to maintain active users after sign up is another aspect of the discussion. This inspired the policy challenge that was presented to the workshop participants: How might we encourage customers to use their bank accounts more actively via agents?Pulling on Insights from the Field to Shape Intervention IdeasThe workshop segued into the ideation session, where participants brainstormed about how to leverage the findings from the field to develop ideas to address the challenge. Here, we offered a practical framework from BIT known as the EAST Framework. An acronym for Easy, Attractive, Social and Timely, this framework is used to generate fresh intervention ideas, based on evidence from behavioural science literature. Participants were also reminded about the significance of the holistic approach of systems thinking when developing ideas, for instance considering the various constraints and how they may interrelate in certain conditions.The next stage was prototyping. In general, prototyping methods vary, depending on a range of factors, such as needs, estimated timeline and scope of an idea. For most of the workshop participants, prototyping was a bit unfamiliar. This was an opportunity for them to ask questions about the steps in prototyping and its merits. Based on the questions received, we thought it was crucial to highlight that a prototype does not have to be in a complete or perfect form. In fact, a prototype may start off with sketches (low-fidelity) using pencil and paper, before advancing to a higher-fidelity format (digital, in the case of digitally based interventions) using more sophisticated resources. Prototyping has the benefits of reduced time and costs, and may also enable crucial early feedback from potential users to inform future development. By allowing actual users to test and experience the prototypes, there’s the possibility of gaining greater user acceptance relevant to their conditions and habits.Low-fidelity prototype(left) and photos from the workshop (right)During the wrap-up session of the workshop, the discussion was centred around a question posed by the participants: “If we implement an intervention idea nationally, how do we know if this intervention is going well?” There are several methods that can be used to conduct an impact evaluation to assess the effectiveness of an intervention. Randomised Controlled Trials (RCT) is an approach that is often used by BIT. In its simplest form, it involves randomly assigning individuals to two groups: the treatment group, which is given the intervention that is being tested; and the control group, which continues to receive the status-quo treatment (which often means: nothing). While this approach can yield statistically reliable results, there are other aspects regarding the approach that must be taken into consideration when using RCT to measure impact. It may also be beneficial to explore suitable alternative methods for obtaining reliable feedback about the impact of an intervention.Walking the TalkA continuation of our collaboration with the Secretariat of the National Council for Financial Inclusion, this workshop included participants from the Indonesian Financial Services Authority, the Executive Office of the President of the Republic of Indonesia, among other representatives from public and private banks in Indonesia. The workshop provided us a unique opportunity to showcase our collaborative work to further address policy challenges related to the acceleration of financial inclusion in Indonesia.The overarching aim of the workshop was to encourage financial services providers and policy makers to test out new ways to tackle issues related to financial inclusion through the use of HCD and behavioural science. And for us at Pulse Lab Jakarta, BIT and SNKI, we have also accepted the challenge to walk the talk and are conducting a research project that combines human-centered design and behavioural science aimed at encouraging financial services customers to use their bank accounts more actively through the use of bank agents. We will be sharing more on this project in the coming months. Stay tuned!As the world’s population continues to increase, governments have been stepping up efforts to ensure that citizens have access to safe and adequate food supply. The Sustainable Development Goals are also undergirded in the ambition to end hunger, which is crucial to sustain humanity. Favoured with fertile soils, abundant natural resources and a conducive climate, Indonesia has for years been a key player in the agriculture sector, helping to meet food consumption demands domestically and in the region. The agriculture sector is also a key economic driver and provides employment to millions of smallholder farmers. Collaborating with the Directorate of Cooperatives and Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) in the Ministry of National Development Planning (Bappenas), Pulse Lab Jakarta developed an interactive visualisation and analysis dashboard that uses the latest agriculture census data to identify smallholder farmers, with respect to the commodities they produce and the size of their landholdings to generate insights that can inform policies relevant to SMEs in the agriculture sector.The Livelihoods of Many Smallholder FarmersIn Indonesia, roughly a third of the land is used for agricultural purposes and the sector contributes significantly to the country’s Gross Domestic Product. Consisting largely of smallholder farmers (defined as having landholding less than two hectares) and large plantations, millions of Indonesians depend on this sector to earn their everyday livelihoods. Smallholder farmers, who typically come from agriculture-dependent households, are also part of the segment of SMEs in Indonesia. Information nonetheless regarding SMEs (in the case of smallholder family farmers) that contribute to the agriculture sector remains limited.Having a better understanding of how many of these smallholder farmers exist; the kinds of commodities they produce; and the land size used can enable the Government to provide more fitting support. Ranging from building practical infrastructure, delivering agriculture and business training programmes, de-linking productivity with climate anomalies/shocks, and providing agriculture production subsidies and credit, such support and policies, all have the potential to improve incomes that can lead to more sustainable livelihoods for smallholder farmers.The Making of the DashboardThe agriculture sector in Indonesia is vast, yet not all smallholder farmers are recognised in official statistics. Furthermore, there’s a dearth of information on productions by smallholder farmers, especially at a subdistrict level. The 2013 Agriculture Census, the latest of six agricultural censuses ever conducted in the country, is the most comprehensive data set currently available. The census includes six agriculture categories, namely food crops, horticulture, estate crops, livestock, fishery and forestry.Within this data set though, there is no indication of which farmers are considered SMEs. Through discussions with Bappenas’ Directorate of Cooperatives and SMEs, we thus decided to experiment with land size as a proxy to determine smallholder farming SMEs. For instance, farmers with landholdings less than one hectare were categorised as SMEs for the food crops category. While for the horticulture category, farmers with landholdings smaller than half a hectare were classified as SMEs.Once the data was processed and the classifications for smallholder farming SMEs for each agriculture category was established, our next move was to prototype a visualisation and analysis dashboard that could cover all 34 provinces in Indonesia, including data on the national and sub-district levels.Interactive, Intuitive and InformativeThe agriculture census in Indonesia is carried out every ten years, where door-to-door interviews and community surveys are conducted using paper questionnaires. The dashboard was intended to not only present the data collected in a way that was digitally interactive (allowing users to easily switch between provinces and survey commodities of interest), but also do so in a visually appealing way. After rounds of iterations alongside our Bappenas colleagues to ensure optimum user experience, we came up with a prototype that allows data overlaying and multiple presentation views.Users can select one of the six agriculture categories to view how a particular type of agriculture is distributed across provinces. Visualised above, after selecting one of the categories (for example “Tanaman Pangan” which means food crops), users can also make further selections from a list of commodities (for example “jagung” which means corn). From there, they’re given two options to choose between: the land size used for the commodity (“Luas Lahan”) and the number of households involved in activities related to this commodity (“Rumah Tangga”).The dashboard also visualises the data at the national level, as well as at the provincial and sub-district levels.National Level: the colours indicate the scale of the number of households involved with growing corn (yellow showing fewer households and dark blue showing a higher number of households)Provincial and Subdistrict Levels: Looking at Nusa Tenggara Timur province as well as its sub-districts, the colours indicate the scale of the number of households involved with growing corn (with yellow showing fewer households and light green showing a higher number of households). Users can also select a particular sub-district to view information regarding land size used and number of households involved.The dashboard offers different data presentation views, allowing users to observe the commodity proportion as well as the number of households associated with it at both the national and provincial levels. From the screenshots below, we see that corn “jagung” accounts for nearly 17 per cent of all agriculture commodities nationally, while again looking specifically at Nusa Tenggara Timur province, corn is the largest commodity in terms of land use.Across all 34 provinces, we are also able to get a sense of each province’s rank based on the number of households involved in corn production (the top three being Nusa Tenggara Timur, Jawa Timur and Jawa Tengah based on the recent census data).The dashboard also provides useful visualisations on the amount of land that is used for a particular category of agriculture, which helps with categorising which farmers fall into the SMEs segment. Again, using land size as a proxy to determine SMEs, the areas with the light blue shade indicate smallholder farmers who may be considered as SMEs since the land use is one hectare or less for food crops.Having an understanding about the type of agriculture commodity, the size of landholding, characteristics of the farm (and the related household) used for production can provide the Government with useful information that can inform resilience efforts when smallholder farmers experience economic shocks. For instance, if smallholder farmers experience sudden, unexpected fluctuations in the price of corn, the Government can better assess what measures to take to render quick support based on the number of households dependent on corn production, with even greater efficiency if the data is up to date. Similarly, should smallholder farmers in a specific region become affected by drought or other natural disasters, the dashboard can help predict which commodities are likely to be impacted and at what scale.Scaling Up Beyond PrototypingUsing the data from the 2013 agriculture census as the single data source, the dashboard was developed as a rapid prototype. We acknowledge that determining smallholder farming SMEs is multidimensional and to be more accurate, we cannot rely on the size of landholding alone. Therefore earlier this month, the Directorate for Cooperatives and SMEs showcased the features of the dashboard to other ministries and government institutions to discuss how the dashboard could be further developed by integrating additional data sets from other ministries to provide a more comprehensive understanding about how the agriculture sector intersects with other areas of national development, as well as to come with a multidimensional proxy for smallholder farming SMEs.Going forward, Bappenas as the custodian of the dashboard, is positioned to explore additional data sets from other ministries (especially with the Satu Data initiative now being implemented) to also ensure the livelihoods of smallholder farmers are safeguarded through long-term resilience planning. Potential data sets that may be integrated include land ownership and land usage data from the National Land Agency, as well as secondary data on the number of smallholder farmers from the Ministry of Agriculture, and agriculture-related statistics from Statistics Indonesia (BPS). Information regarding the size of land used for agriculture purposes can help the Government differentiate between smallholder farmers and large plantations, which in turn can improve the Government’s efficiency in evaluating and issuing land certificates for agriculture-related SMEs.Our team is currently discussing how data regarding irrigation from the Ministry of Public Work and Housing Indonesia may also be combined with weather information to provide insights on suitable periods for planting and harvesting. The Ministry of Agriculture currently generates forecasts and crop suitabilities for upcoming seasons, however such information often loses context, by layering such data into this dashboard, it will be possible to better understand current crop production trends and their drivers. Another use case will be to develop alternative credit scoring schemes for farmers, for instance by overlaying nearest water bodies (as a proxy for access to water), nearest markets/roads (proxy for sale), onto the mapped plots, such data can facilitate credit provision to farmers who are in need of capital.Mapped farm-level data in combination with additional remotely sensed biophysical data layers of climate and soil, can help identify groups (“homologs”) of farmers, with similar household characteristics and biophysical conditions, but with differing yields, meaning some with high yields (referred to as positive deviants), and some with low yields, but belonging to the same group (or homolog). This type of insight can help build farmer to farmer learning alliances, connecting and transferring knowledge between farmers with high yields, with those with lower yields, within the same homolog, thereby using data-derived insights for innovative and tailored agriculture extension programs. We are also interested in harnessing alternative sources of data such as from satellite image and social media to see how these data sets can be fused with traditional agriculture data to inform broader policies related to national economic growth, food security and sustainable living.On the Signing of Satu Data Indonesia, Implementation and What’s Ahead: A Conversation with the Executive Office of the President of IndonesiaPulse Lab JakartaFollowJun 28 · 6 min readSatu Data Indonesia seeks to improve the quality of data governance within Indonesia’s public sector (visualisation taken from the Wawasan Satu Data Toolkit)The Indonesian Government introduced the draft of a Presidential Regulation known as Satu Data Indonesia in 2016 to improve the quality of data governance within Indonesia’s public sector. Along with representatives from government agencies, the private sector and civil society, Pulse Lab Jakarta was pleased to participate in a public consultation session to discuss the draft. Heeding feedback from the discussions, we later teamed up with the Executive Office of the President of Indonesia (KSP) to apply human centered design to develop a toolkit that models data governance at the subnational level. This month, President Joko Widodo signed the regulation which now enables the Government to implement the initiative across government agencies. We caught up with Yanuar Nugroho (Deputy Chief of Staff at KSP) after the signing to discuss the regulation and to learn more about the Government’s implementation plans.Now that the Presidential Regulation on Satu Data Indonesia is signed and sealed, what was the journey like collaborating with all the parties involved?Satu Data Indonesia was borne out of the need to strengthen data governance within Indonesia’s public sector, which was articulated by President Jokowi back in April 2016. After 27 drafts and a lengthy process, I’m pleased that the regulation was finally signed this month. The main challenge perhaps, was getting all the parties involved to be on the same page so to speak, as not everyone immediately understood the concept and its long-term potential benefits. For example, for some people the concept was initially believed to be just a centralised data platform, because the word ‘satu’ in Bahasa Indonesia means ‘one’ and therefore led others to think of the initiative as a singular data system instead of an open data system.Let’s consider data on rice production in Indonesia for example. There are actually different authorities that produce data on this topic, such as the Ministry of Agriculture, Statistics Indonesia (BPS), Ministry of Trade and the Indonesian Bureau of Logistics. The downside is that these data sets are currently not integrated, and a system needs to be in place to produce, share and consume such data across agencies in order to have a clear understanding of the data and shared potential uses. Basically, we want the data to ‘speak to each other.’ This is what’s called data interoperability and is essentially the main tenet of Satu Data Indonesia. This initiative is intended to better facilitate the integration of government planning and budgeting efforts to inform comprehensive, evidence-based policy making at all levels of government.How do you foresee Satu Data Indonesia transforming the ways institutions within the public sector operate and make policy decisions?We are entering a new era of evidence-based policy making. Once Satu Data Indonesia is fully in place, government ministries and agencies will no longer need to develop their own data system, but will instead begin to integrate and maximise the benefits of this data governance framework. This will be a huge step in the right direction for the Government. Satu Data Indonesia is one of the building blocks of our Electronic-Government (e-Gov) architecture. Because with e-Gov, we talk about e-planning, e-budgeting, e-procurement and so on, which means we are talking about data integration, financial budgeting and programme planning.What we aim to do is not only better manage the national budget, but to make government more effective, more efficient, more open and more transparent. This, I believe, in the end will forge a better relationship with and earn more trust from citizens. e-Government is not just about technology, because technology as we know it is never an end in itself. With LAPOR (Indonesia’s National Complaint Handling System) for example, a citizen can complain about anything and now with Satu Data Indonesia, the idea is that you should be able to search for data that is relevant to the public sector.What steps will be taken to ensure a smooth implementation?In the coming weeks, our focus will be on rolling out Satu Data Indonesia across Indonesia. We previously conducted a piloting phase throughout seven ministries — some succeeded, while others did not. But we learnt from both experiences and will share good practices that can be easily adopted. The Ministry of Education and Culture, for instance, successfully revamped its Basic Education Database (Dapodik) to ensure that the data it produces is more organised and can be accessed more efficiently. We envision that other ministries will follow suit but of course in their own fashion. Data integration at a ministerial level will give us a comprehensive picture of how the Government is progressing.The next step from here is to scale up our efforts from the piloting phase, assess what really went well, and explore how we can improve from our failures. The Wawasan Satu Data toolkit that Pulse Lab Jakarta helped develop is crucial, because it helps each ministry to understand the context, define opportunity areas as well as design and test prototypes. The toolkit was created to help stakeholders within the public sector understand data governance in a more holistic way. It was designed through a co-creation process with public sector representatives and incorporated findings based on analysis of the local government context. While developing the toolkit, we found that users have a different set of needs based on their roles within the Satu Data Indonesia framework. As a result, several versions of the toolkit were designed, each contextualised to the needs of its users throughout the data lifecycle. Once we begin the implementation stage, ministries that have already taken part during the Satu Data piloting phase will be able to adapt more easily. Agencies that were not part of the piloting phase may need time to adjust, but that’s where the toolkit will come in very handy as an implementation and engagement tool.What about pay-to-access and other forms of agreement there were previously required for accessing data across ministries?If government agencies currently have a pay-to-access data practice in place, that’s something in particular I foresee will be changed. Memorandums of Understanding also known as MoUs will no longer be required for accessing and sharing data. Satu Data Indonesia aligns with the 2008 Public Information Openness Act which outlines the need for government data to be more open and publicly accessible. To be effective, we will also have to encourage capacity building for both users as well as data producers. Now that these data sets will be open to the public, my hope is that citizens will make use of them to keep an eye on the various development programmes.One of the caveats with the regulation is that it does not explicitly speak to public-private partnership, because Satu Data Indonesia is focused on government data. It does however mention that academics can utilise the data, and there’s some potential for future collaborations between the Government and the private sector. But to get there, the Government needs to first be able to effectively manage their data — which Satu Data Indonesia will help to achieve.When we have this conversation again in a few years, what do you hope Satu Data Indonesia will have achieved?The presidential regulation is a regulatory framework, but for its vision to be realised, it needs to be implemented and socialised among everyone involved in the data life cycle. We need to build demand for Satu Data Indonesia within the public sector in order for it to inform decision making at all levels of government, including subnational, national, ministerial and presidential decision making. I would love for our collaboration with Pulse Lab Jakarta to continue, not only for the toolkit, but also in helping the Indonesian Government to further harness the ongoing data revolution. With the signing of the regulation itself, the President acknowledges the importance of the data revolution and open data. In a few years, I hope I will be able to confidently say that Satu Data Indonesia has successfully addressed many societal challenges, created new means to meet the needs of citizens, and provided numerous insights for data-informed public decision making, especially related to the National Medium Term Development Plan (RPJMN) and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).The Presidential Regulation on Satu Data Indonesia can be accessed here. The above is an excerpt of the full interview, which has been edited and condensed by Pulse Lab Jakarta for clarity and style consistency.The rapid pace of rural to urban migration in recent decades has added new dimensions and challenges for urban planners and social policymakers. Gaining an understanding of the general trends associated with these movements, as well as the more nuanced push and pull factors is crucial for national development planning. To better understand the experiences of citizens across Indonesia who migrate from rural to urban communities, last year Pulse Lab Jakarta collaborated with Empatika on research commissioned by the World Bank. On the heels of the recent mobile phone data for official statistics workshop in Jakarta organised by the UN Global Working Group on Big Data and Statistics Indonesia (BPS), our team at the Lab decided to revisit the study which analysed anonymised mobile network data to uncover insights on migration in Indonesia and which were subsequently used to inform the sampling of qualitative research.Research ScopeTitled “Urban Villages — Perspectives and Experiences of Migrants and Their Families on Moving from Villages to Cities”, the study combines qualitative research methods with big data analysis. The qualitative approach places emphasis on immersion in order to provide researchers with an opportunity to gather in-depth, multidimensional insights from people who make the decision to move from a rural to an urban community, and from those who choose not to make the move. The study sought to better understand the following aspects:(a) General trends associated with urbanisation in Indonesia(b) High-level trends in rural-urban migration and its socioeconomic opportunities and risks(c) Determinants of economic mobility for migrants(d) Socioeconomic and geographical dimensions of urban poverty(e) Policy implications and lessons that can be drawn from these experiencesThe scope of the study was outlined with a view to assisting the Government of Indonesia develop a comprehensive understanding of the phenomenon, to then design relevant policies to drive economic growth, reduce poverty and address a range of related challenges.To capture a cross-sectional view of rural to urban migration in Indonesia, the World bank team selected four destination cities from across the Indonesian archipelago as case studies: Jakarta, Medan, Tangerang and Makassar (two areas were included within Makassar — one central and one peripheral). Based on surveys and previous research, these cities are among the fastest-growing in the country in terms of inbound migration rates. Sampling the source communities where these migrants come from, however, was more challenging due to a lack of up-to-date data, for example surveys and the census become outdated on this topic shortly after data collection.Big Data Meets Thick DataTo help close this knowledge gap in terms of the availability and timeliness of information about where migrants are moving from, Pulse Lab Jakarta analysed aggregate geo-signatures from mobile phone data to identify migrants source communities.How did we conduct this analysis? We teamed up with two of Indonesia’s leading mobile network providers, who were generous in giving us access to insights from their subscribers’ anonymised mobile network data for the period August to November 2017. The datasets included around 20 million individual network subscribers, accounting for roughly three-quarters of the total population in the four destination cities. The datasets were analysed in the following way:Inferring subscriber home location: identify the cellular tower used most frequently by each subscriber between midnight and 5 AM over the course of a month to serve as each subscriber’s “home cell tower”. This is based on the assumption that people would be at their regular places of residence at that time of day. Also, by using a month we hoped to control for the effect of business trips and holidays.Building User “Home Cell Tower” Profiles: a database was created capturing user “home cell tower” locations each month, which included information such as anonymised user, year, month, home cell tower.Determining Source Community: each cell tower was paired with the respective name of the administrative village (desa) in which it is located. In other words, the cell towers were made to represent the desa in which they stood. Therefore, the “home cell tower” of each subscriber was also understood to be the desa where the subscriber resides.Distinguishing Residents from Non-Residents: the “Home Cell Tower” dataset was further filtered to remove users who had not spent at least a month in the particular city of interest. By applying this filter, the datasets would now only contain individuals who could be considered to be residents of the city at some point during the timeframe.Identifying Migrants: to determine which individuals could be considered as “migrants”, we filtered the city-specific anonymised user home tower database for anonymised users that have had home cell towers outside of the city of interest during the timeframe.Generating A Migrant Database: for those identified as migrants, a new dataset was made that included their villages of origin and the current city in which they reside (destination), which we then summed and scaled to get a sense of the relative importance of different source communities of migrants.Making Sense of the Numbers: The visualisations below show the source communities that citizens migrate from (a separate visualisation is generated for each of the four destination cities).Using the Insights: Empatika then used the insights to inform the sampling of the rural communities for the qualitative research.Uncovering New InsightsBeyond the findings of this study, the approach used in this research demonstrates how big data and non-conventional datasets (in this case mobile network data) can be used to better understand internal migration across Indonesia in an efficient, timely and cost-effective manner. In addition to identifying migrant source communities and destination cities, the results of this research also revealed essential insights on the volume and directional movements of rural to urban migration across Indonesia’s vast archipelago.The maps of the source communities show unprecedented granularity, for instance indicating village-level migrant distributions for each destination city. As one would expect, cities such as Medan and Makassar drew most of their migrants from regions that were within close proximity, while migrants to Greater Jakarta came from a broader range of source communities. It is interesting to note that the maps for Medan and Makassar also show Greater Jakarta as a migrant source community, which suggests that the study may also have identified returning migrants.One of the broader implications of the research results is that it is likely that existing metrics and categories significantly underestimate the scale of short-term rural to urban migration in Indonesia. For example, there’s a noticeable difference between the rates of short-term migration observed in this research, compared to existing Susenas data. The mobile network data analysis also generated timely results that were used to sample the qualitative research, enabling ethnographic researchers to visit major source communities of migrants and learn more about the various push and pull factors that contribute to the decisions made by people to migrate, and construct different profiles of migrants.With mobile phone usage across Asia and the developing world increasing, the research approach can be applied elsewhere to provide useful policy insights to understand the needs of migrants and destination communities and improve areas of public service delivery.If you’re interested in knowing more about our approach and how we’ve been harnessing mobile phone data to advance development and humanitarian action, please get in touch with us at plj@un.or.id